.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH dot-ftppasswd 5 "Last change: 14 May 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
dot-ftppasswd \- configuration of FTP logins
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ~/.ftppasswd
.SH DESCRIPTION
This configuration file is used by \fIadis-ftplogin(1)\fP to
verify the credentials passed by \fIadis-ftpup(1)\fP and,
in case of success, to select the parameters for \fIadis-ftpsession(1)\fP.
.LP
It consists of multiple lines, each line defining a FTP login.
Each valid line consists of three fields:
.IP \(bu
a user name, consisting of the login name, a dash, and an extension,
.IP \(bu
a password, encrypted using \fIcrypt(3c)\fP, and
.IP \(bu
options for \fIadis-ftpsession(1)\fP, followed by the root directory
for this FTP login.
.LP
Empty lines and lines beginning with ``#'' are ignored. ``:'' works
as field separator.
.SH EXAMPLE
Following configuration file provides three FTP logins operating
with the privileges of \fBfred\fP. \fBfred-web\fP allows to
access a directory outside the home directory with unrestricted
write access, while \fBfred-upload\fP allows files to be uploaded
non-destructively into the directory \fBtmp/upload\fP below
the home directory. \fBfred-pub\fP provides read-only access to
\fBtmp/pub\fP.
.Pg
fred-web:NtaCKb111yqoc:-U /home/www/htdocs/users/fred
fred-upload:IHP8zJbZVkgTk:-u tmp/upload
fred-pub:jxl8ww2Dog0aI:tmp/pub
.Pe
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb adis-ftpsession(1)
.Tp adis-ftplogin(1)
interpretes this configuration file.
.Tp adis-ftpsession(1)
interpretes the options and the root directory passed in the
third field.
.Tp patch_passwd(1)
may be used to edit the password.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: dot-ftppasswd.5,v 1.1 2001/05/14 16:27:17 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: dot-ftppasswd.5,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/05/14 16:27:17  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
