.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1996 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH BBS 3 "Last change: 16 April 1997" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
BBS \- implementation of the Blum, Blum, and Shub pseudo random number generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE CreateSequence(VAR sequence: RandomGenerators.Sequence; 
                         blumInt: IntOperations.Operand;
                         seed: IntOperations.Operand);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I BBS
offers a cryptographically secure implementation of \fIRandom(3)\fP. The 
implementation uses a quadratic residue generator developed by Blum, Blum, and 
Shub. For references look at SIAM Journal on Computing, v. 15,n. 2, 1986, pp.
364-383: L. Blum, M. Blum, and M. Shub,
\fIA Simple Unpredictable Pseudo-Random Number Generator\fP or RFC 1750, 6.3.2. This pseudo random generator is the most 
simple and efficient one for the generation of cryptographically secure random 
values. It is comparatively slow and less useful for stream ciphers, but for 
high security applications, like key generation, the generator is the best 
known. \fIBBS\fP does not replace the predefined sequence 
\fIRandomGenerators.std\fP.
.LP
.I CreateSequence
creates and initializes a new sequence of pseudo random numbers. The sequence
of random numbers depends on \fIseed\fP and on the given Blum integer 
\fIblumInt\fP. 
.LP
A Blum integer is defined as the product of two large prime numbers which are
congruent to 3 modulo 4. For cryptographically secure applications the Blum 
integer must have an appropriate length because the security rests on the
difficulty of factoring the Blum integer. In Douglas R. Stinson, \fICryptography\fP,
4.4 and 4.8 at least 200 decimals (about 650 bit) are recommended but the 
larger the better. If \fIblumInt\fP is not given, then a default 128 bit Blum 
integer is used.
.LP
\fIseed\fP is expected to be a random integer which is relatively prime to
\fIblumInt\fP. Relatively prime means that the greatest common divisor of
\fIseed\fP and \fIblumInt\fP is 1. Good, hardly reproducible seed values are
available in \fIRandomGenerators.seed\fP,
for example by using \fIUnixSeeds(3)\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIBBS\fP asserts \fIseed\fP to be not \fBNIL\fP and checks whether \fIseed\fP
is relatively prime to \fIblumInt\fP or not. If not, then \fIseed\fP is slightly
corrected.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb RandomGenerators(3)
.Tp IntOperations(3)
generic interface for arithmetic integer operations
.Tp RandomGenerators(3)
general abstraction for pseudo random number generators
.Tp UnixSeeds(3)
generation of seed values in the UNIX operating system
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Frank B.J. Fischer
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: BBS.3,v 1.1 1997/04/16 13:01:28 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: BBS.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  1997/04/16  13:01:28  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
