.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH DNSStdResolvers 3 "Last change: 9 June 2004" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
DNSStdResolvers \- standard implementation of \fIDNSResolvers(3)\fP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST noRecordsFound = 0;
CONST nonExistingDomain = 1;
CONST toomanyCNAMEs = 2;
CONST badCNAME = 3;
CONST errors = 4;
TYPE ErrorCode = SHORTINT; (* noRecordsFound... *)
TYPE ErrorEvent = POINTER TO ErrorEventRec;
TYPE ErrorEventRec =
      RECORD
	 (Events.EventRec)
	 errorcode: ErrorCode;
	 domain: DNSRecords.Name;
	 rrtype: DNSRecords.RRType;
      END;
VAR errormsg: ARRAY errors OF Events.Message;
VAR error: Events.EventType;
.cp 0.7
PROCEDURE Create(VAR resolver: DNSResolvers.Resolver);
PROCEDURE CreateFromConfiguration(VAR resolver: DNSResolvers.Resolver;
				  configuration: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I DNSStdResolvers
provides an implementation of \fIDNSResolvers(3)\fP that
is based on \fIDNSRequests(3)\fP and uses configurations
that conform to \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP.
During its initialization, \fIDNSResolvers.std\fP is created,
provided it was not already initialized by another implementation.
.LP
.I Create
creates a standard resolver with a configuration from
\fI/etc/resolv.conf\fP which can be overridden by some environment
parameters (see below). If this file is not present or cannot be parsed
and no DNS cache has been specified by the \fIDNSCACHEIP\fP environment
variable, 127.0.0.1 is taken as nameserver.
.LP
.I CreateFromConfiguration
works like \fICreate\fP but selects \fIconfiguration\fP as
pathname of the configuration file instead of \fI/etc/resolv.conf\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I DNSStdResolvers
makes the error events of the underlying module \fIDNSRequests(3)\fP
available. In addition, following error events are created:
.Tb nonExistingDomain
.Tp noRecordsFound
The domain name is valid but no records of the requested type
were found.
.Tp nonExistingDomain
The given domain name does not exist.
.Tp toomanyCNAMEs
The chain of CNAME records was too long. This is possibly the cause
of a reference cycle.
.Tp badCNAME
A CNAME record pointed to a non-existant domain name.
.Te
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.Tb LOCALDOMAIN
.Tp DNSCACHEIP
If defined, overrides the \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP configuration
and selects the given IPv4 address (in dotted decimal notation) of a
DNS cache as the only nameserver. This environment parameter was
first defined by Dan J. Bernstein for his resolver library,
see http://cr.yp.to/djbdns/resolve.html.
.Tp LOCALDOMAIN
Defines, if given, the local domain. By default, the settings
of ``domain'' and ``search'' within the \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP
configuration file are considered.
.Tp LOCALRES
Selects, if defined, the configuration file that
conforms to \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP. This environment parameter
was introduced with the \fIdig(1)\fP utility of the BIND package.
.Te
.SH FILES
.Tb /etc/resolv.conf
.Tp /etc/resolv.conf
The default configuration file.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb ResolvConfParser(3)
.Tp DNSResolvers(3)
general interface for resolvers.
.Tp ResolvConfParser(3)
is used to parse \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP configuration files.
.Te
.SH BUGS
The \fIsortlist\fP directive within the \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP configuration
is not supported.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: DNSStdResolvers.3,v 1.2 2004/06/09 23:11:49 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: DNSStdResolvers.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2004/06/09 23:11:49  borchert
.\" typos fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2004/03/19 14:04:51  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
