.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH EphemeralPortRange 3 "Last change: 9 February 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
EphemeralPortRange \- select anonymous ports
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE Get(VAR smallest, largest: INTEGER);
PROCEDURE Set(smallest, largest: INTEGER);
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE GetRandomPort() : INTEGER;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
The ephemeral port range is defined to be the range of ports from which
anonymous ports are selected. This selection is requested if a port
number of 0 is specified within a socket address.
.PP
Unfortunately the system's choice of an ephemeral port number can be
easily predicted on most operating systems. This can be a security risk
where blind forgeries can be a threat.  One example is the DNS protocol
where UDP response packages can be successfully forged if the port number
and the request id of the DNS client can be easily guessed.
.PP
.I EphemeralPortRange
allows to reduce this risk by helping to select unpredictable
ports. \fISet\fP and \fIGet\fP allow to set and to retrieve the range
of ephemeral ports that are to be used. By default, a range of 32768 up
to 65535 is taken. This default can be changed by environment variables
(see below).
.PP
.I GetRandomPort
returns a port number out of the range of ephemeral port
numbers using the unpredictable sequence of pseudo random
numbers \fIRandomGenerators.unpredictable\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I Get
asserts that \fIsmallest\fP is smaller than \fIlargest\fP
and that both values are within the range of valid port numbers.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.Tb EPHEMERAL_PORT_RANGE_SMALLEST
.Tp EPHEMERAL_PORT_RANGE_SMALLEST
Default value of the smallest ephemeral port number.
.Tp EPHEMERAL_PORT_RANGE_LARGEST
Default value of the largest ephemeral port number.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb RandomGenerators(3)
.Tp IPv4TCPSockets(3)
attempts to use port numbers suggested by \fIGetRandomPort\fP
if a port number of 0 is given.
.Tp RandomGenerators(3)
sequences of pseudo random numbers including
\fIRandomGenerators.unpredictable\fP.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: EphemeralPortRange.3,v 1.2 2005/02/09 20:14:55 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: EphemeralPortRange.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2005/02/09 20:14:55  borchert
.\" table fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2004/03/09 19:14:01  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
