.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH FTPTimerEvents 3 "Last change: 10 July 2003" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
FTPTimerEvents \- timeout event management for FTP sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST setTimeoutCmd = 0;
CONST resetCmd = 1;
CONST startTransferCmd = 2;
CONST endOfTransferCmd = 3;
.sp 0.3
TYPE Event = POINTER TO EventRec;
TYPE EventRec =
      RECORD
         (Events.EventRec)
         cmd: SHORTINT; (* setTimeoutCmd .. endOfTransferCmd *)
         timeout: Times.Time;
      END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE GetEventType(session: FTPSessions.Session;
                       VAR eventType: Events.EventType);
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE SetTimeout(session: FTPSessions.Session; period: Times.Time);
PROCEDURE Reset(session: FTPSessions.Session);
PROCEDURE StartTransfer(session: FTPSessions.Session);
PROCEDURE EndOfTransfer(session: FTPSessions.Session);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I FTPTimerEvents
provides an event type and event generating shortcuts for
the timeout management of a FTP session. It does not,
however, provide any event handlers. This is typically
done by \fIFTPTimers(3)\fP.
.SS Notifications
.I SetTimeout
is usually called during the initialization time of a FTP session and
sets the current timeout value which is undefined by default.
.LP
.I Reset
resets the current timer, if defined, to \fB0\fP. This operation
is to be called when input from the FTP client is seen to measure
the time of inactivity.
.LP
Timeouts should not hit during file transfers (either downloads or uploads)
as the main network connection remains inactive for longer time.
.I StartTransfer
and
.I EndOfTransfer
allow to signal such time periods to the timeout management.
.SS Event Handling
Events are usually handled by a separate task that handles
the event type returned by
.I GetEventType
for a particular session object.
Following events are generated by the notification procedures:
.Tb endOfTransferCmd
.Tp setTimeoutCmd
set timeout value to \fItimeout\fP,
which may be \fBNIL\fP to switch off timeouts.
.Tp resetCmd
reset timer to \fB0\fP, if defined.
.Tp startTransferCmd
disable timer until \fIendOfTransferCmd\fP is encountered.
.Tp endOfTransferCmd
re-enable timer, if defined.
.Te
.LP
Event handling tasks should be aware of the termination of
the session object, see \fIResources(3)\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPSessions(3)
.Tp FTPSessions(3)
FTP session objects.
.Tp FTPTimers(3)
standardized event handler for \fIFTPTimerEvents\fP
that terminates session objects in case of timeouts.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: FTPTimerEvents.3,v 1.3 2003/07/10 09:07:23 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: FTPTimerEvents.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  2003/07/10 09:07:23  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/05/08 08:33:49  borchert
.\" FTPServers renamed to FTPSessions
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/04/23 10:08:56  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
