.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH FTPUnixDirLister 3 "Last change: 7 May 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
FTPUnixDirLister \- list UNIX directories for FTP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST regular = 0; directory = 1; symlink = 2; other = 3;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE GetFileType(pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                      VAR ftype: SHORTINT;
                      errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE GetSize(pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                  VAR size: LONGINT;
                  errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE GetTimestamp(pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                       VAR timestamp: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                       errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE List(s: Streams.Stream;
               pathname, relpath, pattern: ARRAY OF CHAR;
               long: BOOLEAN;
               errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I FTPUnixDirLister
offers some auxiliary functions for handlers of some FTP
commands that list the contents of a directory or retrieve
file properties.
.LP
.I GetFileType
returns a simplified file type of \fIpathname\fP. Files of
type \fIother\fP should usually neither be accessed nor shown
by FTP services.
.LP
.I GetSize
returns the size of \fIpathname\fP in bytes under the assumption
of a binary transfer mode.
.I GetTimestamp
returns, in conformance to \fIFTPCommands.mdtm\fP, the time
of the last modification of \fIpathname\fP in the form
\fBYYYYMMDDHHMMSS\fP.
.LP
.I List
prints to \fIs\fP,
.IP \(bu
if \fIpathname\fP is a directory,
a filtered list of filenames contained in it, or,
.IP \(bu
if \fIpathname\fP is a regular file,
a single line for it.
.LP
Lines output resemble that of ``/bin/ls -la'' if \fIlong\fP is
set to \fBTRUE\fP, and to ``/bin/ls'' otherwise. However,
.IP \(bu
directory entries other than directories, regular files, and
symbolic links are suppressed,
.IP \(bu
file protection modes are always given as ``-rw-r--r--''
(for regular files), ``drwxr-xr-x'' (for directories),
and ``lrwxrwxrwx'' (for symbolic links), and
.IP \(bu
the file owner is given as \fB0\fP (root). A column for group owner
is not given.
.LP
The original pathname in \fIpathname\fP is never revealed. Instead
\fIrelpath\fP is printed, if given, and, in case of a directory
listing, the filename inside a directory is provided.
The wildcard pattern \fIpattern\fP is, if given for a directory,
matched against filenames inside of directories and works as filter.
Wildcard patterns are interpreted by \fIScanDir(3)\fP but locally
only against filenames found inside the directory specified by
\fIpathname\fP. Multi-level patterns like ``*/*'' do not work.
.LP
All occurences of newlines in directory entries are replaced
by null bytes when being output to \fIs\fP.
.SH EXAMPLE
A directory containing a regular file called \fItextfile\fP, a
sub-directory called \fIsubdir\fP and a symbolic link \fIlink\fP
to \fItextfile\fP would be shown as:
.Pg
drwxr-xr-x   3 0            512 May  7 13:51 .
drwxr-xr-x   3 0            512 May  7 13:51 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 0              7 May  7 13:51 textfile
drwxr-xr-x   2 0            512 May  7 13:51 subdir
lrwxrwxrwx   1 0              8 May  7 13:51 link -> textfile
.Pe
The same directory as shown by \fB/bin/ls -la\fP:
.Pg
total 10
drwxrwxr-x   3 afb      sai          512 May  7 15:51 .
drwxrwxr-x   3 root     root         512 May  7 15:51 ..
lrwxrwxrwx   1 afb      sai            8 May  7 15:51 link -> textfile
drwxrwxr-x   2 afb      sai          512 May  7 15:51 subdir
-rw-rw-r--   1 afb      sai            7 May  7 15:51 textfile
.Pe
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All procedures return \fBFALSE\fP in case of errors and relate
all error events to \fIerrors\fP but do not generate any error
events on themselves.
.I GetSize
and
.I GetTimestamp
return results for valid regular files only.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
All path names coming from the FTP client should be checked
by \fIFTPUnixPaths.CheckAndProcessSymLinks\fP before passing
them directly to any of these operations. Otherwise, the
pseudo chroot jail is not effective, see \fIFTPUnixPaths(3)\fP.
.LP
The directory listings by this module do not rely on any external
programs (like \fI/bin/ls\fP) but provide, to stay compatible
with a large number of FTP clients, listings that look like
those generated by \fI/bin/ls\fP except that
.IP \(bu
multi-level globbing is not supported to avoid denial-of-service attacks
as otherwise triggered by patterns like ``*/../*/../*/../*/../*'',
.IP \(bu
entries other than that of regular files, directories and
symbolic links are suppressed,
.IP \(bu
entries are not suppressed because of their name beginning with ``.'',
.IP \(bu
ownership is reported as \fB0\fP (super-user) regardless of the real
ownership,
.IP \(bu
file protection is reported as writable for the owner,
readable/executable for all others regardless of the true
file protection, and
.IP \(bu
options like ``-la'' are neither supported nor even recognized. The
pathname is taken literally instead.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
.Tp FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
uses this module to implement the related FTP commands.
.Te
.SH BUGS
The directory listings are not sorted. Unicode is not supported yet.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: FTPUnixDirLister.3,v 1.3 2001/05/07 20:57:49 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: FTPUnixDirLister.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  2001/05/07 20:57:49  borchert
.\" Short was accidently left in SYNOPSIS
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/05/07 14:01:45  borchert
.\" Short & Long replaced by List
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/04/24 15:44:43  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
