.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH FTPUnixFileSystems 3 "Last change: 10 July 2003" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
FTPUnixFileSystems \- present selected UNIX file hierarchy for FTP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE AddHandler(session: FTPSessions.Session; root: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE PermitUploads(session: FTPSessions.Session);
PROCEDURE PermitUpdates(session: FTPSessions.Session);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I FTPUnixFileSystems
provides a handler for \fIFTPSessions(3)\fP that presents a
selected file hierarchy of a UNIX file system for the FTP protocol.
.LP
.I AddHandler
installs the support for following FTP commands in conformance
to RFC 959 that allows to access the directory designated by \fIroot\fP
and all sub-directories thereof. A pseudo chroot jail on base
of \fIFTPUnixPaths(3)\fP is established that maps ``..'' of \fIroot\fP
to \fIroot\fP and interpretes all symbolic links below \fIroot\fP
relative to \fIroot\fP.
.LP
By default, read-only access is provided that may be extended by
.I PermitUploads
which allows non-destructive uploads that prohibit any changes of
existing files and
.I PermitUpdates
that enables unrestricted access (inside the pseudo chroot jail).
.LP
Following FTP commands are handled:
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.allo\fP
is responded by a short message that \fBALLO\fP is obsolete.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.appe\fP and \fIFTPCommands.stor\fP
are supported, if permitted.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.cdup\fP
is equivalent to \fIFTPCommands.cwd\fP with an argument of ``..''.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.cwd\fP
changes the current directory of a FTP session
(but not that of the server process).
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.list\fP and \fIFTPCommands.nlst\fP:
Directory listings on base of \fIFTPUnixDirLister(3)\fP.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.mdtm\fP and \fIFTPCommands.size\fP:
File attribute inquiries in conformance to
``Extensions to FTP'' by the FTPEXT Working Group of the IETF,
see \fBhttp://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-ftpext-mlst-12.txt\fP.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.mkd\fP and \fIFTPCommands.rmd\fP
are supported, if permitted.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.mode\fP:
The only supported transfer mode is ``S'' (stream mode).
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.pwd\fP:
Prints the current working directory as absolute path
(beginning with ``/'') that is interpreted relative to \fIroot\fP.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.rnfr\fP and \fIFTPCommands.rnto\fP
are supported in case of unrestricted write access (\fIPermitUpdates\fP).
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.rest\fP:
File positions beside \fB0\fP are accepted in binary mode only.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.stru\fP:
The only supported file structure is ``F'' (text file).
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.syst\fP
is answered with ``UNIX Type: L8''.
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.type\fP:
The only accepted transfer types are ``A'', ``A N''
(ASCII mode with LF to CR-LF conversion or vice-versa),
``I'', and ``L 8'' (binary mode without conversions).
.IP \(bu
\fIFTPCommands.xcup\fP,
\fIFTPCommands.xcwd\fP,
\fIFTPCommands.xmkd\fP,
\fIFTPCommands.xpwd\fP,
\fIFTPCommands.xrmd\fP
are supported in conformance to RFC 775 and equivalent to their
counterparts of RFC 959.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I FTPUnixFileSystems
does not generate error events on its own but relates all
error events to \fIsession\fP where they may be evaluated and
logged later by \fIFTPLoggers(3)\fP and \fIFTPLogPrinter(3)\fP.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
"/" should never be passed to \fIroot\fP. This enables otherwise
a large number of attacks on various devices in \fB/dev\fP or
conflicts with other processes in directories like \fB/tmp\fP
that are writable for everybody. In general, \fIroot\fP should
be restricted to private sub-directories where information leaks
provide no security threat and uploaded files are not considered
as executable files or program text without further checks.
Even read-only accesses to home directories are to be
considered as dangerous as
they open access to otherwise secret informations
like \fB.ssh/identity\fP (see \fIssh(1)\fP).
\fIAddHandler\fP, however, accepts anything as \fIroot\fP.
.LP
All response texts generated by \fIFTPUnixFileSystems\fP avoid
leakage of the path of \fIroot\fP and detailed error messages
that are directly derived from error events. Instead all
pathnames are presented relative to \fIroot\fP and standard
error messages are given in case of failures. More informations
may be taken from the logs.
.LP
The security considerations of \fIFTPUnixDirLister(3)\fP and
\fIFTPUnixPaths(3)\fP apply.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPUnixDirLister(3)
.Tp FTPDataStreams(3)
implementation of FTP data channels
.Tp FTPUnixDirLister(3)
built-in generation of directory and file listings
.Tp FTPUnixPaths(3)
support of pseudo chroot jail
.Te
.SH BUGS
\fIFTPCommands.stou\fP is not yet implemented.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: FTPUnixFileSystems.3,v 1.3 2003/07/10 09:07:33 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: FTPUnixFileSystems.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  2003/07/10 09:07:33  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/05/08 09:58:19  borchert
.\" workaround for groff problem with \fB. added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/05/08 09:56:30  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
