.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH FTPUnixPaths 3 "Last change: 24 April 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
FTPUnixPaths \- path-based pseudo chroot jails
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Path = POINTER TO PathRec;
TYPE PathRec = RECORD (Disciplines.ObjectRec) END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE CreatePath(VAR path: Path;
                     root, pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE CreateDerivedPath(VAR path: Path; oldpath: Path;
                            pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE GetRelPath(path: Path; VAR pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE GetAbsPath(path: Path; VAR pathname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE Upward(path: Path);
PROCEDURE ChangeDir(path: Path; dirname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE CheckAndProcessSymLinks(path: Path;
                                  newfile: BOOLEAN;
                                  VAR expandedPath: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                                  errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I FTPUnixPaths
offers path name operations that allow to realize pseudo chroot
jails for FTP server processes that do not run with root privileges
which would be required for \fIchroot(2)\fP.
To avoid accesses outside a given
root directory, care has to be taken regarding uplinks via ``..''
and of symbolic links that may point outside the chosen file hierarchy.
.LP
.I CreatePath
and
.I CreateDerivedPath
create paths that may be later manipulated using \fIUpward\fP and
\fIChangeDir\fP. Before accessing a file or directory,
.I CheckAndProcessSymLinks
is to be used to convert a path into a pathname free of symbolic links and
uplinks which resides inside the simulated chroot jail.
.LP
.I CreatePath
creates \fIpath\fP out of \fIpathname\fP that is to be taken
relative to \fIroot\fP, the assumed pseudo root.
.I CreateDerivedPath
creates a new path out of \fIoldpath\fP with relative path \fIpathname\fP.
The new path shares its root with the old path.
.LP
.I GetRelPath
returns the relative uplink-free pathname of \fIpath\fP as string, while
.I GetAbsPath
returns the absolute uplink-free pathname including its root.
Neither \fIGetRelPath\fP nor \fIGetAbsPath\fP check for symlinks.
.LP
.I ChangeDir
appends \fIdirname\fP to \fIpath\fP. References to the
upward directory (``..'') and to the same directory (``.'') are
processed as by the constructors
.I CreateDerivedPath
and
.IR CheckAndProcessSymLinks .
Likewise is the upward link of the pseudo root is interpreted to point to
the pseudo root itself.
.I Upward
is equivalent to
.I ChangeDir
with ``..'' as \fIdirname\fP.
.LP
.I CheckAndProcessSymLinks
should be used to extract a path name usable for \fIUnixFiles\fP
or similar modules before accessing files or directories. It
checks the entire path for symbolic links and interpretes them
relative to the pseudo root of \fIpath\fP. The last component
of \fIpath\fP may be non-existant if \fInewfile\fP is set to \fBTRUE\fP.
On success, a symlink-free absolute path that points
inside of the pseudo root is returned in
\fIexpandedPath\fP. Access errors, if any, are related to \fIerrors\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I FTPUnixPaths
does not generate any error events on its own.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
Pseudo chroot jails are less safe than chroot jails on base of
\fIchroot(2)\fP:
.IP \(bu
The process is still free to access files and directories outside
the pseudo root. That means that if an attacker is able to execute
supplied code inside a FTP server process he or she is not bound to the
restrictions of \fICheckAndProcessSymLinks\fP.
.IP \(bu
In the time frame between the check using \fICheckAndProcessSymLinks\fP
and the actual access of the path found in \fIexpandedPath\fP,
symbolic links could be added that would direct the access outside of
the pseudo chroot jail.
.LP
In summary,
.I FTPUnixPaths
helps to restrict FTP accesses to a particular directory and below
(a home directory, for example) while running not with super-user
privileges. This is an improvement in comparison to FTP servers
that, if not logged in anonymously, provide unrestricted access to
the whole file system including shared spaces like \fI/tmp\fP.
But it is far from offering the security of a chroot jail based
on \fIchroot(2)\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
.Tp FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
FTP command handler that implements file and directory accesses
on base of this module.
.Te
.SH BUGS
Following limits are silently imposed on all pathnames:
.IP \(bu
An entire path that is extracted as string is limited to 8192 bytes.
This limit applies to pseudo roots as well.
.IP \(bu
Path components are limited to 512 bytes.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: FTPUnixPaths.3,v 1.1 2001/04/24 10:01:19 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: FTPUnixPaths.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/04/24 10:01:19  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
