.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2006 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH InetResolver 3 "Last change: 9 August 2006" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
InetResolver \- resolve domain style names to Internet addresses
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE HostByAddr(address: IPv4Addresses.SocketAddress;
                     VAR host: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                     errors: RelatedEvents.Object);
PROCEDURE AddrByHost(host: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                     VAR address: IPv4Addresses.SocketAddress;
                     errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE HostByIPv6Addr(address: IPv6Addresses.SocketAddress;
                         VAR host: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                         errors: RelatedEvents.Object);
PROCEDURE IPv6AddrByHost(host: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                         VAR address: IPv6Addresses.SocketAddress;
                         errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE GetHostName(VAR hostname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE GetDomainName(VAR domain: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I InetResolver
allows to map host names to IPv4 or IPv6 addresses and vice versa.
This module is based on \fIDNSResolvers(3)\fP and one of
its implementations (most likely \fIDNSStdResolvers(3)\fP).
Note that this means that a working DNS cache is required.
Alternative sources like \fI/etc/hosts\fP or configurations
like \fI/etc/nsswitch.conf\fP are not considered.
.LP
.I HostByAddr
stores the domain style address of \fIaddress\fP into
\fIhost\fP.
If the name server is unable to reverse the address, the IPv4 address
is returned in the dotted-decimal representation.
.LP
.I AddrByHost
tries to convert the domain style address \fIhost\fP
to an IPv4 address.
If successful, the address is stored into \fIaddress\fP
and \fIAddrByHost\fP returns \fBTRUE\fP.
.LP
.I HostByIPv6Addr
and
.I IPv6AddrByHost
operate like
.I HostByAddr
and
.I AddrByHost
but convert from or to IPv6 addresses.
.LP
.I GetHostName
returns the host name of the calling process.
The host name is given without the domain.
.I GetDomainName
returns the domain name of the calling process.
The concatenation of the host name and the domain name
(separated by ".") yields the full qualifying name
of the current host machine.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
In case of failures, error events are generated by the
underlying modules.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb DNSStdResolvers(3)
.Tp DNSResolvers(3)
general interface for DNS resolvers
.Tp DNSStdResolvers(3)
standard implementation of \fIDNSResolvers(3)\fP
.Tp IPv4Addresses(3)
IPv4 address type
.Tp IPv6Addresses(3)
IPv6 address type
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: InetResolver.3,v 1.7 2006/08/09 15:32:05 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: InetResolver.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.7  2006/08/09 15:32:05  borchert
.\" IPv6 support added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.6  2004/06/02 20:33:06  borchert
.\" depends now on the DNS modules instead of the ypmatch hack
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  2003/07/10 09:07:56  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1995/03/13 09:54:12  borchert
.\" Resolver renamed to InetResolver
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1992/03/17  07:34:07  borchert
.\" errors-parameters rearranged
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1991/11/25  09:15:16  borchert
.\" new error handling (error codes and associated events)
.\" errors parameter added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1991/11/18  08:00:58  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
