.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1997 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH InetHTTPDaemon 3 "Last change: 24 April 1998" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
InetHTTPDaemon \- receive HTTP connections from clients
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE HTTPD = POINTER TO HTTPDRec;
TYPE HTTPDRec =
   RECORD
      (Disciplines.ObjectRec)
   END;
.sp 0.7
CONST cantWriteTexts = 0;
CONST cantTruncTexts = 1;
CONST cantSeekOnTexts = 2;
CONST errorcodes = 3;
.sp 0.3
TYPE ErrorCode = SHORTINT; (* cantWriteTexts..cantSeekOnTexts *)
.sp 0.3
TYPE ErrorEvent = POINTER TO ErrorEventRec;
TYPE ErrorEventRec =
   RECORD
      (Events.EventRec)
      errorcode: ErrorCode;
   END;   
.sp 0.3
VAR errorMessages: ARRAY errorcodes OF Events.Message;
VAR error: Events.EventType;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Start(httpD: HTTPD): BOOLEAN;
PROCEDURE Terminate(httpD: HTTPD);
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE Create(VAR httpD: HTTPD; port: Networks.Address; 
                 handler: WebHandlers.Handler);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIInetHTTPDaemon\fP module waits for clients to connect to it via network.
For each connection a task is created to read and parse the request of a client.
After splitting the request into pieces (method, URL, version, header fields and
body) the parts are transfered to a web handler for further processing.
Persistent connections are supported.
.PP
\fICreate\fP creates a new daemon. It will wait an  \fIport\fP for connecting
clients. After a request is split into pieces the given \fIhandler\fP is called
to process the request.
.PP
\fIStart\fP starts a daemon. The procedure will return \fBFALSE\fP if the
desired port is not available. \fITerminate\fP stops a running daemon.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are related to the  daemon-object. The following error codes can occur:
.Tb cantSeekOnTexts
.Tp cantWriteTexts
can't write to a \fITexts\fP-stream
.Tp cantTruncTexts
problems truncing a \fITexts\fP-stream at position zero
.Tp cantSeekOnTexts
unable to call \fIStreams.Seek\fP with a \fITexts\fP-stream
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb RelatedEvents(3)
.Tp HTTPHeaders(3)
manage HTTP-header fields
.Tp Networks(3)
general abstraction for network connections
.Tp RelatedEvents(3)
error handling
.Tp Tasks(3)
general tasks management
.Tp WebHandlers(3)
processing of HTTP requests
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Manfred Rue\*s, University of Ulm
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: InetHTTPDaemon.3,v 1.1 1998/04/24 17:47:25 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: InetHTTPDaemon.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  1998/04/24  17:47:25  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
