.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1997 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH InetURLs 3 "Last change: 24 April 1998" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
InetURLs \- abstraction to handle Uniform Resource Locators
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE URL = POINTER TO URLRec;
TYPE URLRec =
   RECORD
      (Disciplines.ObjectRec)
      scheme: Streams.Stream;
   END;
.sp 0.7
TYPE AssignProc = PROCEDURE (url: URL; s: Streams.Stream): BOOLEAN;
TYPE ToStringProc = PROCEDURE (url: URL; VAR stringURL: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.sp 0.3
Interface = POINTER TO InterfaceRec;
InterfaceRec =
   RECORD
      assign: AssignProc;
      toString: ToStringProc;
   END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Init(url: URL; if: Interface);
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE Assign(url: URL; s: Streams.Stream): BOOLEAN;
PROCEDURE ToString(url: URL; VAR stringURL: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
The module \fIInetURLs\fP provides an abstraction for Uniform Resource Locators
(URLs). It defines the
handling and the common part of all URLs (the sheme).
.SS "Providing URLs"
Implementations must initialize new instances of web handlers using \fIInit\fP,
specifying an interface \fIif\fP containing
following procedures. Only the \fIAssign\fP procedure needs to be implemented.
\fIToString\fP is optional.
.Is
.If assign "\fIurl\fP: \fIURL\fP; \fIs\fP: \fIStreams.Stream\fP" \fBBOOLEAN\fP
assigns the Stream \fIs\fP to the URL. The Stream is parsed from the actual
position to \fBEOF\fP, or until the next space, tab, or newline is reached. The
elements are stored in \fIurl\fP. Escaped characters remain still escaped. 
\fIs\fP must be able to handle substreams. '\fIAssign\fP' will return
\fBFALSE\fP if \fIurl\fP doesn`t conform to the URL expected (e.g. a stored
FTP-URL can`t be parsed as a  HTTP-URL). \fBFALSE\fP will also returned if there
are other syntactical errors. Related events raised to \fIurl\fP closer describe
the errors.
.If toString "\fIurl\fP: \fIURL\fP; \fBVAR\fP \fIstringURL\fP: \fBARRAY OF CHAR\fP"
combines the parts of an URL to a string. Necessary fill characters will be
added. This Procedure is optional.
.Ef
.SS "Using URLs."
\fIAssign\fP parses the stream \fIs\fP and assigns the URL parts to separat
variables. The parsing starts at the actual position of the \fIs\fP.
.PP
\fIToString\fP combines all parts of an URL and provides a string.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIInetURLs\fP does not generate error events by itself. Only underlying
implementations raise errors as \fIRelatedEvents(3)\fP to \fIurl\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb SubStreams(3)
.Tp Streams(3)
stream operations
.Tp SubStreams(3)
Interval of a Stream
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Manfred Rue\*s, University of Ulm
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: InetURLs.3,v 1.1 1998/04/24 17:47:39 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: InetURLs.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  1998/04/24  17:47:39  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
