.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH IPv4NameSystems 3 "Last change: 22 September 2004" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
IPv4NameSystems \- import root nodes using IPv4 sockets
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST errors = 6;
CONST colonExpected = 0;
CONST portExpected = 1;
CONST invalidPortNumber = 2;
CONST hostnameExpected = 3;
CONST unableToFindPort = 4;
CONST tooManyIndirections = 5;
TYPE ErrorCode = SHORTINT; (* colonExpected.. *)
TYPE ErrorEvent = POINTER TO ErrorEventRec;
TYPE ErrorEventRec =
   RECORD
      (Events.EventRec)
      errorcode: ErrorCode;
      source: ARRAY 128 OF CHAR;
   END;
VAR error: Events.EventType;
VAR errormsg: ARRAY errors OF Events.Message;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Import(ipaddr: IPv4Addresses.SocketAddress;
                 VAR root: Names.Node;
                 errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE ImportFrom(source: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                     VAR root: Names.Node;
                     errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Convert(source: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                  VAR address: Networks.Address;
                  errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I IPv4NameSystems
is based upon \fINamesBootService(3)\fP and supports the import
of a root node using an IPv4 socket.
.LP
.I Import
allows the direct specification of an IPv4 address
whereas
.I ImportFrom
accepts a specification which can be either
.IP \(bu
a fully qualified host name for which A records can be found,
followed by a colon and a port number, or
.IP \(bu
an IPv4 address in the dotted decimal notation,
followed by a colon and a port number, or
.IP \(bu
a domain name for which a TXT record can be found that
provides an ``ons'' attribute according to RFC 1464. In
this case,
.I ImportFrom
works recursively with the attribute value found.
At maximum three indirections are accepted.
.LP
.I Convert
converts a specification as described above for \fIImportFrom\fP
to be converted into a network address that can be passed on
to \fINamesBootService(3)\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Following error events are possibly generated by
.IR IPv4NameSystems :
.Tb tooManyIndirections
.Tp colonExpected
A colon was expected but not found in the specification.
.Tp portExpected
A port number was expected but not found in the specification.
.Tp invalidPortNumber
The port number was out of range.
.Tp hostnameExpected
The specification was empty.
.Tp unableToFindPort
Just a domain name was given in the specification and a
TXT record could not be obtained.
.Tp tooManyIndirections
The upper limit of three indirections for TXT record references
was exceeded.
.Te
.PP
In addition, error events can be expected by the
underlying modules.  This includes mainly events from
\fIDNSResolvers(3)\fP and of \fIInetTCP(3)\fP.
All error events are related to the \fIerrors\fP parameters.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb NamesBootService(3)
.Tp NamesBootService(3)
service that provides the address of the root object
at a known location.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: IPv4NameSystems.3,v 1.2 2004/09/22 21:29:15 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: IPv4NameSystems.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2004/09/22 21:29:15  borchert
.\" error handling and Convert added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2004/03/30 21:10:53  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
