.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1994 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH Messages 3 "Last change: 15 April 1999" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
Messages \- management of messages for attachable handlers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Object = Disciplines.Object;
.sp 0.2
TYPE Message = POINTER TO MessageRec;
TYPE MessageRec =
   RECORD
      (PersistentDisciplines.ObjectRec)
      processed: BOOLEAN;
      done: BOOLEAN;
      errors: RelatedEvents.Object;
   END;
.sp 0.2
TYPE Handler = PROCEDURE (object: Object; VAR message: Message);
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE InstallHandler(object: Object; handler: Handler);
.sp 0.2
PROCEDURE Send(object: Object; VAR message: Message);
PROCEDURE Init(message: Message); (* doesn't call NEW *)
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Messages
allows to attach arbitrary message handlers to objects
which are an extension of \fIDisciplines.Object\fP.
An object may have any number of message handlers attached
which will be able to process every message sent to the object.
.PP
\fIMessages\fP itself does not support the persistency of
message handlers if objects are an extension
of \fIPersistentDisciplines.Object\fP.
Nevertheless, the persistency of the handlers may be achieved
if they are all associated with the object or
one of its persistent disciplines.
In this case, \fIInstallHandler\fP has to be called by the
\fIcreate\fP interface procedures of the object or its disciplines
for \fIPersistentObjects\fP.
.PP
Modules which implement abstractions which are based on messages
have to
.IP \(bu
declare extended types of \fIMessage\fP
which represents the operations and
additional components for the associated parameters.
.IP \(bu
provide methods for \fIPersistentObjects\fP
to create, read and write their message types.
This is required to allow remote procedure calls and logging.
.IP \(bu
define a handler of type \fIHandler\fP which processes
all incoming messages and ignores those which are not recognized.
If known message are processed, the \fIprocessed\fP component
and, on success, the \fIdone\fP component
should be set to \fBTRUE\fP.
If \fIprocessed\fP becomes \fBTRUE\fP,
no further message handlers will be called for that message.
Errors have to be related to \fIerrors\fP.
.IP \(bu
call \fIInstallHandler\fP for each object whose messages are
to be processed.
.PP
All newly created messages must be initialized by \fIInit\fP
(which itself doesn't call \fBNEW\fP).
\fIInit\fP sets \fIprocessed\fP and \fIdone\fP to \fBFALSE\fP
and initializes \fIerrors\fP to an object with
an empty error queue
(see \fIRelatedEvents(3)\fP for details).
Afterwards, additional components which represent the parameters
of the operation may be set.
\fISend\fP allows then to send the message to the given object.
.PP
\fIMessages\fP supports \fIForwarders\fP by installing
a forwarding handler for dependent objects.
Note that the installation of handlers is not
affected by \fIForwarders.Forward\fP,
i.e. \fIInstallHandler\fP installs always \fIhandler\fP
for \fIobject\fP independently from any dependency relations.
Local handlers take always precedence over the handlers
of the object which is depended on.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors lead to events which are related to the given stream
in case of input and output operations or to the object.
As described above, errors raised by message handlers are conventionally
related to the \fIerrors\fP component of the message.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb PersistentDisciplines(3)
.Tp Forwarders(3)
general forwarding operation
.Tp PersistentObjects(3)
input and output of persistent objects
.Tp PersistentDisciplines(3)
input and output of attached data structures
of persistent objects
.Tp PersistentEvents(3)
input and output of events
.Tp RelatedEvents(3)
error handling
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: Messages.3,v 1.9 1999/04/15 08:11:33 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: Messages.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.9  1999/04/15  08:11:33  borchert
.\" old reference to ForeignEvents replaced by PersistentEvents
.\"
.\" Revision 1.8  1995/03/20  08:39:03  borchert
.\" - Messages supports now Forwarders
.\" - base type of target objects changed:
.\"   PersistentDisciplines.Object --> Disciplines.Object
.\"
.\" Revision 1.7  1994/07/18  14:13:20  borchert
.\" Messages no longer generates error events itself
.\"
.\" Revision 1.6  1994/03/08  12:36:44  borchert
.\" message is now a VAR-parameter of Handler & Send
.\" this was a necessary change for RemoteObjects
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  1994/01/29  12:22:41  borchert
.\" great simplification of Messages:
.\" (1) Disciplines.Object is no longer supported
.\" (2) RegisterHandler has been removed. So, InstallHandler has
.\"     to be called by the appropriate interface procedures for
.\"     PersistentObjects
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1993/06/23  16:30:42  borchert
.\" SizeOf removed from PersistentObjects.CapabilitySet
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1993/06/16  07:35:01  borchert
.\" SizeOf depends now from the stream
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1993/06/12  16:39:43  borchert
.\" erroneous hint removed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1993/06/11  17:20:19  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
