.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1998 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
.TH PasswordShards 3 "Oberon System"
.SH NAME
PasswordShards \- authorization based on knowing a secret
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Pot = POINTER TO PotRec;
TYPE PotRec = RECORD (Shards.PotRec) END;
.sp 0.3
TYPE Lid = POINTER TO LidRec;
TYPE LidRec = RECORD (Shards.LidRec) END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE CreatePot(VAR pot: Shards.Pot; password: OneWayHashes.Value);
PROCEDURE CreateLid(VAR lid: Shards.Lid; password: OneWayHashes.Value);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I PasswordShards
provides lids that can be reproduced at any time from some secret
information, traditionally called password, and pots that can
verify these without actually storing the original information.
.PP
For practical reasons, fixed-length, high-entropy hash values
are preferred over arbitrary-length, low-entropy messages users
might have typed in for pass phrases.
Applications should perform a suitable hash function, such as
.IR MD5(3) ,
on these phrases and use the generated hash values with
procedures of this module.
.PP
.I CreateLid
creates a lid containing the given information.
Note that secure transmission of lids is not an issue addressed
by this particular implementation.
.PP
.I CreatePot
creates a pot accepting lids with the given information
while denying any other one almost certainly.
Additional salting and hashing steps are employed to hide the
original information, so that matching lids cannot feasibly
be derived from pots alone.
As a consequence,
.I Shards.Supply
is of course not supported.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb PersistentObjects(3)
.Tp Shards(3)
abstraction for authorization protocols
.Tp OneWayHashes(3)
abstraction for one-way hash functions
.Tp RandomGenerators(3)
abstraction for pseudo random number generation
.Tp PersistentObjects(3)
abstraction for persistent objects
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Martin Hasch, University of Ulm
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: PasswordShards.3,v 1.1 1998/04/10 17:34:33 martin Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: PasswordShards.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  1998/04/10  17:34:33  martin
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Martin Hasch, 1996
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
