.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH Priorities 3 "Last change: 13 September 1996" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
Priorities \- priority system for events
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST region = 10;
CONST gap = 10;
.sp 0.7
TYPE Priority = INTEGER;
.sp 0.7
VAR base: Priority;
VAR default: Priority;
VAR message: Priority;
VAR syserrors: Priority;
VAR liberrors: Priority;
VAR assertions: Priority;
VAR error: Priority;
VAR interrupts: Priority;
VAR storage: Priority;
VAR rtserrors: Priority;
VAR fatal: Priority;
VAR fatalsignals: Priority;
VAR bug: Priority;
VAR taskswitch: Priority;
VAR exit: Priority;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Priorities
defines the priority system of the Oberon library
per initialized variables.
The original module can be copied and modified to match
the needs of a specific application.
This is necessary in cases where e.g. library errors should get
higher priority than asynchronous interrupts.
.LP
The priority values are not consecutive to be open for
extensions.
Each priority given below defines a base value of a priority region.
The region size is defined by
.IR region ,
e.g. library error priorities range from
.I liberrors
to
.IR liberrors+region-1 .
To allow insertion of new priority levels there is a minimum distance
between two priority regions (\fIgap\fP).
.LP
Some rules for ordering priority values:
.IP (1)
Events with higher severity should have higher priority levels,
e.g. segmentation violations should be at higher level than
the interrupts (break key).
.IP (2)
Some events allow a level-oriented generalized error handling
(\fIErrors(3)\fP).
These events must be at higher priority than those events
which lead to errors.
E.g. \fIerror\fP should be at higher priority than \fIliberrors\fP,
\fIfatal\fP at higher priority than \fIstorage\fP, and
\fIbug\fP at higher priority than \fIfatalsignals\fP.
.IP (3)
Events raised at an higher abstraction level should have higher
priority than low-level events.
E.g. \fIliberrors\fP should be at higher priority than
\fIsyserrors\fP.
.bp
.LP
The following list of prioritities is in ascending order.
.Tb fatalsignals
.Tp base
Current priority at beginning of execution
(after initialization of \fIEvents\fP).
This is the lowest priority possible during execution.
Every event with priority less than \fIbase\fP is ignored
automatically.
.Tp default
Default priority of events.
The priority of an event can be changed using \fIEvents.SetPriority\fP.
.Tp message
Priority of messages which do not indicate an error.
.Tp syserrors
Priority of system call errors.
It is convention in the Oberon system library that
events are raised for failed system calls
(which are ignored by default).
.Tp liberrors
Priority of library errors,
e.g. usage errors or failed system calls.
Library errors should have higher priority than \fIsyserrors\fP.
.Tp assertions
Priority of failed assertions inside library.
Conventionally, failed assertions are handled by \fIAssertions(3)\fP.
.Tp error
Priority of (application) error messages or warnings.
.Tp interrupts
Priority of asynchronous interrupts like break key, alarm clock, etc.
.Tp storage
Priority of "out of space" events (\fISysStorage(3)\fP)
.Tp rtserrors
Priority of runtime errors.
.Tp fatal
Priority of fatal errors which lead to an error message and
program termination.
.Tp fatalsignals
Priority of fatal signals.
These are UNIX signals where return would cause an infinite loop,
e.g. segmentation violation, alignment fault, and illegal instruction.
.Tp bug
Priority of bugs and (failed) assertions.
Bugs are error messages followed by program termination
(with core dump if possible).
.Tp taskswitch
This priority was used formerly by \fITasks(3)\fP but
is now obsolete.
.Tp exit
Priority of exit (\fISysProcess.Exit\fP) and abort (\fISysProcess.Abort\fP).
Actions on this priority level should be minimized
and (if possible) error-free.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb SysSignals(3)
.Tp Assertions(3)
handling of failed assertions
.Tp Conclusions(3)
standardized handling of error events
.Tp Events(3)
priority driven event handler
.Tp SysProcess(3)
handling of program termination (\fIexit\fP)
.Tp RTErrors(3)
raise of runtime errors (\fIrtserrors\fP)
.Tp SysErrors(3)
standardized handling of system errors
(\fIsyserrors\fP)
.Tp SysSignals(3)
UNIX signals (\fIinterrupts\fP and \fIfatalsignals\fP)
.Tp SysStorage(3)
memory management (\fIstorage\fP)
.Tp Tasks(3)
task management
.Te
.SH FILES
.Tb /usr/local/lib/oberon/def/Priorities.od
.Tp /usr/local/lib/oberon/def/Priorities.od
definition of \fIPriorities\fP
.Tp /usr/local/lib/oberon/def/Priorities.om
module of \fIPriorities\fP
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: Priorities.3,v 1.6 1996/09/13 13:17:04 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: Priorities.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.6  1996/09/13  13:17:04  borchert
.\" - enhanced formatting
.\" - reference to Messages(3) removed
.\" - taskswitch priority is now obsolete
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  1992/03/24  08:29:06  borchert
.\" Process renamed to SysProcess
.\" Signals renamed to SysSignals
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1991/12/28  09:51:57  borchert
.\" priority for task switch events added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1991/11/22  09:16:55  borchert
.\" assertions added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1991/06/21  15:28:48  borchert
.\" /usr/local/lib/oberon dependency introduced
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  90/08/31  17:02:17  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\" 
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
