.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH SysArgs 3 "Last change: 3 June 2004" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
SysArgs \- interface to UNIX command line arguments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
(* $P- $O- don't trace any pointers here *)
TYPE Argument = POINTER TO ARRAY large OF CHAR;
TYPE Arguments = POINTER TO ARRAY large OF Argument;
(* $P= $O= *)
.sp 0.7
VAR argc: INTEGER;
VAR argv: Arguments;
.sp 0.7
VAR envc: INTEGER;
VAR environ: Arguments;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I SysArgs
is initialized by the runtime startoff and interfaces the
UNIX command line arguments and environment parameters.
.PP
.I argc
and
.I envc
are set to the number of arguments (including the command name)
and the number of environment parameters.
.I argv
and
.I environ
point to the list of arguments and environment parameters, respectively.
These pointers may be modified but not the objects they point to.
Oberon has no appropiate data type for pointers to character arrays
with unknown length.
The problem is fixed by using pointers
to array types with sufficient length (to avoid range check faults).
But this restricts access to the basic elements (i.e. characters).
Access of these arrays in their entirety could cause memory faults.
.PP
Note that
.I environ
may be \fBNIL\fP.
The types \fIArgument\fP and \fIArguments\fP are protected
against pointer tracing by the garbage collector.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb UnixEnvironment(3)
.Tp UnixArgLists(3)
construction of argument lists
.Tp UnixArguments(3)
convenient interface for reading command line arguments
.Tp UnixEnvironment(3)
convenient interface for environment parameters
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: SysArgs.3,v 1.4 2004/06/03 08:29:09 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: SysArgs.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.4  2004/06/03 08:29:09  borchert
.\" $P and $O included in the signature
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1993/06/12 16:46:53  borchert
.\" hint about $P protection for Argument and Arguments added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1992/03/24  09:18:04  borchert
.\" ArgList renamed to UnixArgLists
.\" Arguments renamed to UnixArguments
.\" Environment renamed to UnixEnvironment
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1990/08/31  17:02:21  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
