.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH SysCommands 3 "Last change: 13 September 1996" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
SysCommands \- system-dependent interface to commands
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Name = POINTER TO ARRAY 1024 OF CHAR;
TYPE CommandList = POINTER TO CommandRec;
TYPE CommandRec =
   RECORD
      next: CommandList;
      name: Name;
      proc: PROCEDURE;
   END;
TYPE ModuleList = POINTER TO ModuleRec;
TYPE ModuleRec =
   RECORD
      next: ModuleList;
      name: Name;
      init: PROCEDURE;
      commands: CommandList;
   END;
.sp 0.7
VAR modules: ModuleList;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I SysCommands
is an interface to the runtime system which collects
commands (parameterless exported procedures) during
the early runtime startup.
.PP
Because the modules where the commands belong to are
not necessarily initialized it is important to call the
.I init
procedure of
.I ModuleRec
prior to calls of any commands.
Only the first call of an initialization part is effective,
all further calls are no-operations.
.PP
The order of modules is topological and in
linkage order in case of unrelated modules.
Command lists are in order of appearance (in source code).
.PP
It is important to note that the components of
.I CommandRec
are read-only because they are part of the UNIX text segment.
The pointer components of the records \fICommandRec\fP and
\fIModuleRec\fP are protected against tracing of garbage collectors.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb SysModules(3)
.Tp oc(1)
Oberon compiler
.Tp SysModules(3)
list of modules
.Te
.SH BUGS
Modules do not insert their parameterless exported procedures
by default into the structure of
.IR SysCommands .
The
.B -C
flag must be given at compile time (see \fIoc(1)\fP) to enable this
feature.
The current version of the library does not export commands.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: SysCommands.3,v 1.5 1996/09/13 07:36:55 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: SysCommands.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.5  1996/09/13  07:36:55  borchert
.\" typo fixed: init is a component of ModuleRec (and not of CommandRec)
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1993/06/11  13:17:38  borchert
.\" Modules renamed to SysModules
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1993/06/11  12:59:10  borchert
.\" Commands renamed to SysCommands
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1993/06/11  08:20:50  borchert
.\" runtime startup has been changed:
.\" now, we have an initialized data structure before any of
.\" the modules is initialized
.\" caveat about $P compilation hint added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1990/08/31  17:02:12  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
