.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH SysStorage 3 "Last change: 9 November 1995" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
SysStorage \- storage allocator with copying garbage collector
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fISysStorage\fP is a possible implementation of the
interface of \fIStorage(3)\fP.
.PP
Additionally, this version also implements the \fIUntaggedStorage(3)\fP
interface.
.PP
The current implementation utilizes \fISysMemory.Map\fP
which allows to allocate memory at arbitrary memory locations
and \fIMemory(3)\fP which manages the address space.
During startup, \fISysStorage\fP initializes \fIMemory(3)\fP
and calls \fIMemory.SetPageSize\fP.
Further, \fISysStorage\fP examines the segments of \fISysSegments(3)\fP
and registers them by calling \fIMemory.ReserveRegion\fP.
.PP
\fISysStorage\fP supports growing stacks and redzone protections.
For this to work, it defines a handler for \fISysSignals.SIGSEGV\fP
which checks all memory access faults for being stack extensions.
The event component \fIfixed\fP will be set to \fBTRUE\fP if
the address which caused the failure will be valid afterwards.
.PP
A copying garbage collector is available. During a garbage collection,
all global data and coroutine stacks are scanned for pointers refering
to dynamic storage objects.
All objects within reach are copied into a new memory location and the
corresponding pointer values are corrected.
.PP
When very large objects are requested (e.g. object size greater than the
system's page size), \fISysStorage\fP checks if it is advantageous
to treat them in a special way which makes it possible that such objects
need not be copied by the garbage collector and the amount of memory
needed for running a garbage collection is reduced.
.PP
For best address space utilization in case of large objects,
it is recommended to request sizes which are (nearly) a power of 2.
.PP
After a garbage collection, the old memory regions are deallocated using
\fIMemory.ReleaseRegion\fP and \fISysMemory.Unmap\fP.
\fISysStorage\fP also looks for coroutines which can not be activated and
is responsible for the deallocation of their stacks.
In that case, \fISysInterrupts.interrupts\fP is updated.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fISysStorage\fP raises \fIStorage.outOfMemory\fP short before
running out of memory.
.PP
\fIProcess.endOfGarbageCollection\fP is guaranteed to be raised, if
\fIProcess.startOfGarbageCollection\fP has been before, but it may occur
that \fIProcess.startOfGarbageCollection\fP is raised and
and no garbage collection can be performed. This happens when
\fISysInterrupts.interrupts\fP is not \fB0\fP, or if there is not enough
storage left to run a collection.
A garbage collection is also rejected, 
if the current priority is higher than \fIPriorities.storage\fP
(\fIProcess.startOfGarbageCollection\fP is not raised).
.
.PP
This implementation does not use \fICoroutines.tag\fP to identify coroutines.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb UntaggedStorage(3)
.Tp Coroutines(3)
exports \fICoroutines.tag\fP which marks coroutines
.Tp Memory(3)
address space management
.Tp Priorities(3)
event priority system
.Tp Storage(3)
storage allocating interface for the compiler
.Tp SysInterrupts(3)
bookkeeping about interrupted coroutines
.Tp SysMemory(3)
Oberon interface to \fImmap(2)\fP related calls
.Tp SysSegments(3)
list of reserved memory regions
.Tp SysSignals(3)
event manager of \fISysSignals.SIGSEGV\fP
.Tp UntaggedStorage(3)
interface for storage not affected by garbage collection
.Te
.br
Andreas Borchert, \fIReport of Ulm's Oberon Compiler\fP,
University of Ulm, SAI
.SH FILES
.Tb SysSegments(3)
.Tp /dev/zero
is used as memory object for \fISysMemory.Map\fP.
\fISysStorage\fP fails completely if this file cannot
be opened.
.Te
.SH ADAPTATION
Hansj\*org N\*agele, University of Ulm
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: SysStorage.3,v 1.6 1995/11/09 14:49:21 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: SysStorage.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.6  1995/11/09  14:49:21  borchert
.\" some minor changes which were necessary for the HTML conversion
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  1994/07/01  09:05:55  borchert
.\" adapted to GC by Hansjoerg Naegele
.\" supports now interfaces of Storage & UntaggedStorage
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1993/06/10  13:14:38  borchert
.\" completely new rewritten:
.\" the former SysStorage has been now splitted into the
.\" interface for the compiler Storage and a particular implementation
.\" the new implementation now utilizes Memory and SysMemory
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1992/03/24  09:22:05  borchert
.\" Process renamed to SysProcess
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1991/11/14  08:19:26  borchert
.\" EventNumber -> EventType
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1990/08/31  17:02:23  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
