.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2008 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH SysTime 3 "Last change: 21 October 2008" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
SysTime \- access to the system clock
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Time = SysTypes.Time;
TYPE TimesRec =
   RECORD
      utime: Time;          (* CPU time while in user mode *)
      stime: Time;          (* CPU time while in system mode *)
      cutime: Time;         (* user time of all children *)
      cstime: Time;         (* system time of all children *)
   END;
TYPE TimeVal =
   RECORD
      sec: Time;            (* seconds and ... *)
      usec: Time;           (* ... micro seconds *)
   END;
TYPE TimeZone =
   RECORD
      minuteswest: INTEGER; (* of Greenwich *)
      dsttime: INTEGER;     (* type of dst correction to apply *)
   END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE GetTime() : Time;
PROCEDURE GetTimeOfDay(VAR time: TimeVal; VAR timezone: TimeZone);
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE GetUnitsPerSecond() : INTEGER;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE GetProcessTimes(VAR times: TimesRec);
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE RealTime(reset: BOOLEAN) : Time;
PROCEDURE CPUTime(reset: BOOLEAN) : Time;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE Alarm(seconds: Time);
PROCEDURE AlarmTime() : Time;
PROCEDURE Sleep(seconds: Time);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I GetTime
returns the current GMT time in seconds since Jan, 1, 1970.
.I GetTimeOfDay
returns the current time and timezone.
.PP
.I GetUnitsPerSecond
returns the number of units per second. Some of the following
procedures work with time measurements in units instead of seconds.
.PP
.I GetProcessTimes
returns time-accounting information for the current process and for
the terminated child processes of the current process.
All times are measured in units.
.PP
.I RealTime
returns the real time in units elapsed since the start of the process
or since the last call with \fIreset\fP \fBTRUE\fP.
.I CPUTime
works like
.I RealTime
but returns the CPU time.
.PP
.I Alarm
causes \fISig.ALRM\fP to be raised after the given number of real time
seconds.
Only one alarm clock is supported by the system.
Thus multiple calls of \fIAlarm\fP reset the alarm clock.
An argument of 0 causes the alarm clock to be cancelled.
.I AlarmTime
returns the number of seconds remaining to the entry of the event.
.I Sleep
suspends the process for the given number of real time seconds.
\fISleep\fP uses \fIAlarm\fP but preserves the setting of
the alarm clock.
To assure compatibility to other parts of the library,
time conditions (see \fITimeConditions(3)\fP)
should be used instead of \fISleep\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
None of these system calls is expected to fail.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb alarm(2)
.Tp time(1)
shell command interface to \fItimes(2)\fP
.Tp alarm(2)
\fIAlarm\fP, \fIAlarmTime\fP, and \fISleep\fP
.Tp pause(2)
used for suspension by \fISleep\fP
.Tp time(2)
\fIGetTime\fP
.Tp times(2)
\fIGetProcessTimes\fP, \fIRealTime\fP and \fICPUTime\fP
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: SysTime.3,v 1.1.2.5 2008/10/21 14:19:38 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: SysTime.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1.2.5  2008/10/21 14:19:38  borchert
.\" UnitsPerSecond was replaced by GetUnitsPerSecond
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.2.4  2004/01/15 22:03:58  borchert
.\" - typo fixed
.\" - SEE ALSO table converted to .Tb/.Te construct
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.2.3  1993/01/11 08:26:29  borchert
.\" additional note to Sleep
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1.2.2  1991/11/14  08:19:45  borchert
.\" TimeVal, TimeZone & GetTimeOfDay added (Sun version only)
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1990/11/02  21:46:53  oberon
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
