.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH TermAttributes 3 "Last change: 9 January 1996" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
TermAttributes \- support of display attributes on ASCII terminals
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
(* attributes *)
.sp 0.3
CONST standout = 0;
CONST underline = 1;
CONST reverse = 2;
CONST blink = 3;
CONST dim = 4;
CONST bold = 5;
CONST attributes = 6;
.sp 0.3
(* errorcodes *)
.sp 0.3
CONST unknownAttribute = 0;
CONST notSupported = 1;
CONST errorcodes = 2;
.sp 0.7
TYPE AttributeSet = SET;  (* of attributes *)
TYPE SetProc = PROCEDURE (s: Streams.Stream; atts: AttributeSet);
TYPE Interface = POINTER TO InterfaceRec;
TYPE InterfaceRec = 
   RECORD
      (Objects.ObjectRec)
      set: SetProc;
   END;
TYPE ErrorEvent = POINTER TO ErrorEventRec;
TYPE ErrorEventRec =
   RECORD
      (Events.EventRec)
      errorcode: SHORTINT;
   END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Init(s: Streams.Stream; available: AttributeSet; if: Interface);
PROCEDURE Set(s: Streams.Stream; attributes: AttributeSet);
PROCEDURE Current(s: Streams.Stream): AttributeSet;
PROCEDURE Available(s: Streams.Stream): AttributeSet;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I TermAttributes
adds support of display attributes on ASCII terminals. Display attributes are 
used on character-based displays to highlight selected characters when they
appear on the screen. More than one attribute can be active at the same 
time. Following attributes are supported by the abstraction:
.PP
.Tb standout
.Tp standout
standout mode is the standard mode to highlight selected characters. On many
terminals it's a combination of one or more of the other attributes.
.Tp underline
underline character
.Tp reverse
reverse fore- and background colour of character
.Tp blink
make character blink at a certain frequency
.Tp dim
draw character with less intensity
.Tp bold
draw character bold or with more intensity
.Te
.PP
.I Init
has to be called by the underlying terminal implementation
with the interface specified by \fIif\fP and the available 
attributes in \fIset\fP.
.PP
.I Set
makes \fIattributes\fP the active set. 
.PP
.I Current
returns the set of attributes currently in use.
.PP
.I Available
returns the set of available attributes.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are converted to events of type \fIerror\fP which are passed to
\fIRelatedEvents\fP for further handling. Following errorcodes are currently
implemented:

.Tb unknownAttribute
.Tp unknownAttribute 
an attribute to be set with 
.I Set 
is not supported by the terminal.
.Tp notSupported 
the terminal does not support attributes.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb Streams(3)
.Tp Streams(3)
abstraction for byte oriented input and output
.Tp Terminals(3)
abstraction for terminals
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Ralf Beck
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: TermAttributes.3,v 1.6 1996/01/09 13:41:18 rbeck Exp rbeck $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: TermAttributes.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.6  1996/01/09  13:41:18  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  1996/01/09  13:33:12  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1996/01/02  15:21:53  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1995/12/20  12:35:22  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1995/12/14  13:08:49  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1995/12/13  14:50:57  rbeck
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
