.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH TermLineGraphics 3 "Last change: 9 January 1996" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
TermLineGraphics \- support of line graphics on ASCII terminals
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
(* graphics characters *)
.sp 0.3
CONST verticalLine = 0;
CONST horizontalLine = 1;
CONST lowerRightCorner = 2;
CONST upperRightCorner = 3;
CONST upperLeftCorner = 4;
CONST lowerLeftCorner = 5;
CONST cross = 6;
CONST leftTee = 7;
CONST rightTee = 8;
CONST bottomTee = 9;
CONST topTee = 10;
CONST chars = 11;
.sp 0.3
(* character sets *)
CONST standard = 0; graphics = 1;
.sp 0.7
TYPE GraphicsChar =                    
   RECORD
      set: SHORTINT;
      char: CHAR;
   END;
.sp 0.3
TYPE CharSet = ARRAY chars OF GraphicsChar; (* graphics charset *)
.sp 0.7
TYPE SetProc = PROCEDURE (s: Streams.Stream; charset: SHORTINT);
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Init(s: Streams.Stream; charset: CharSet; setCharset: SetProc);
PROCEDURE Draw(s: Streams.Stream; char: SHORTINT);
PROCEDURE HLine(s: Streams.Stream; line, column, length: INTEGER);
PROCEDURE VLine(s: Streams.Stream; line, column, length: INTEGER);
PROCEDURE Box(s: Streams.Stream; line, column, lines, columns: INTEGER);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I TermLineGraphics
adds basic line drawing capabilities to ASCII terminals. Terminals that
support line graphics usually provide an alternate character set for graphics
characters. \fITermLineGraphics\fP uses only a subset of all the
graphics characters that may be supported by a particular terminal.
The information for a specific character, i.e. the character set it belongs
to and it's ASCII-code, is stored in a record of type \fIGraphicsChar\fP.
.PP
\fIInit\fP has to be called by the underlying terminal implementation with the
set of graphics characters in \fIcharset\fP and a procedure for changing
character sets in \fIsetCharset\fP.
If \fIInit\fP was not called, \fITermLineGraphics\fP uses a default set of
non-graphics characters for drawing.
.PP
\fIDraw\fP draws a single graphics character.
.PP
\fIHLine\fP draws a horizontal line.
.PP
\fIVLine\fP draws a vertical line.
.PP
\fIBox\fP draws a rectangle.
.PP
The drawing procedures do not test for valid screen coordinates.
.SH AUTHOR
Ralf Beck
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: TermLineGraphics.3,v 1.4 1996/01/09 14:32:32 rbeck Exp rbeck $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: TermLineGraphics.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.4  1996/01/09  14:32:32  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1996/01/02  15:54:53  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1995/12/14  15:05:56  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1995/12/13  14:51:36  rbeck
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
