.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2005 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH UnixArchives 3 "Last change: 7 March 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
UnixArchives \- stream input from archives
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
CONST arnamelength = 14;
.sp 0.7
TYPE MemberName = ARRAY arnamelength+1 OF CHAR;
TYPE ArchiveHeader =
   RECORD
      name: MemberName;      (* name of archive member *)
      date: SysTypes.Time;   (* in seconds since Jan 1, 1970 *)
      uid, gid: INTEGER;     (* user and group id *)
      mode: SET;             (* protection mode, see SysStat(3) *)
      size: SysTypes.Offset; (* size in bytes *)
   END;
TYPE Archive = POINTER TO ArchiveRec;
TYPE ArchiveRec =
   RECORD
      (Streams.StreamRec)
      (* readonly stat information of current archive member *)
      header: ArchiveHeader;
   END;
.sp 0.7
(* error codes *)
CONST notAnArchiveFile = 0;     (* magic header not found *)
CONST corruptedArchive = 1;     (* corrupted archive file *)
CONST memberNotFound = 2;       (* archive member file not found *)
CONST outOfRange = 3;           (* seek failure: position out of range *)
CONST readFailed = 4;           (* unexpected read failure *)
CONST seekFailed = 5;           (* unexpected seek failure *)
CONST tellFailed = 6;           (* unexpected tell failure *)
CONST errorcodes = 7;           (* number of error codes *)
.sp 0.3
TYPE ErrorCode = SHORTINT;      (* 0..errorcodes-1 *)
TYPE Event = POINTER TO EventRec;
TYPE EventRec =
   RECORD
      (Events.EventRec)
      stream: Archive;
      code: ErrorCode;
   END;
.sp 0.3
VAR errormsg: ARRAY errorcodes OF Events.Message;
VAR streamError: Events.EventType;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE Open(VAR archive: Streams.Stream;
               arname: ARRAY OF CHAR;
               membername: ARRAY OF CHAR;
               errors: RelatedEvents.Object) : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.3
PROCEDURE Reopen(archive: Streams.Stream;
                 membername: ARRAY OF CHAR) : BOOLEAN;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I UnixArchives
supports stream input from archives
in common archive file format.
This archive file format is supported by UNIX System V
and BSD systems.
The minor difference between UNIX System V and BSD systems
\&(filenames are "/"-terminated in UNIX System V) is tolerated.
Archives from UNIX Edition VII cannot be read.
.PP
.I Open
opens \fIarname\fP(\fImembername\fP) for reading.
If \fImembername\fP equals "", the first member of the archive will
be opened for reading.
.I Open
fails if
.I arname
cannot be opened or if
.I membername
cannot be found (or if the archive is empty).
.I Reopen
may be called to read another archive member of an already opened
archive stream.
If
.I membername
equals "", the next member of the archive will be opened for reading.
.I Reopen
fails if
.I membername
cannot be found or at the end of the archive.
It is important to note that
.I Reopen
does not close the stream in case of failures.
.PP
.I UnixArchives
maintains an incremental internal member list of the archive
which avoids rescanning of the archive in case of
.IR Reopen .
The main goal of
.I UnixArchives
is to support reading of
.I REF
and
.I SYM
archive files.
In this case it is very useful to maintain a list of archives
which are opened with
.I membername
"" during initialization time.
When an archive member is sought for,
the list of archives can be examined until the first
.I Reopen
succeeds.
.SH EXAMPLE
Print all archive member names of a given archive:
.Pg
PROCEDURE ListArchive(archive: ARRAY OF CHAR);
   VAR
      ar: Streams.Stream;
BEGIN
   IF UnixArchives.Open(ar, archive, "", NIL) THEN
      REPEAT
         Write.Line(ar.header.name);
      UNTIL ~UnixArchives.Reopen(ar, "");
      Streams.Release(ar);
   END;
END ListArchive;
.Pe
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I Open
passes the \fIerrors\fP parameter together with an error event
of type \fIstreamError\fP to \fIRelatedEvents\fP in case of errors.
Further, \fIOpen\fP returns \fBFALSE\fP on failure.
.LP
Errors during the access of the stream are converted
into events of \fIRelatedEvents\fP.
By default, these events are being queued.
.LP
Error events which are generated by \fIUnixArchives\fP contain
one of the error codes following:
.Tb notAnArchiveFile
.Tp notAnArchiveFile
The magic string of archives at the beginning of the file has not been found.
.Tp corruptedArchive
An archive member header cannot be read or is corrupted.
.Tp memberNotFound
The given member name (# "") cannot be found in the given archive.
.Tp outOfRange
Seek position is negative or beyond the end of the archive member.
.Tp readFailed
A read operation failed unexpectantly.
.Tp seekFailed
A seek operation failed unexpectantly.
.Tp tellFailed
A tell operation failed unexpectantly.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb RelatedEvents(3)
.Tp ar(1)
maintaining of archives
.Tp RelatedEvents(3)
error event handling
.Tp Streams(3)
stream operations
.Tp SysStat(3)
protection modes
.Tp ar(3head)
archive file format
.Te
.SH BUGS
The BSD version of archive files uses trailing blanks as
filename delimiter.
Thus filenames with trailing blanks are extracted without trailing blanks.
.PP
Archive member names are restricted to 14 characters even on
file systems which support longer names. 
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: UnixArchives.3,v 1.6 2005/03/07 15:29:24 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: UnixArchives.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.6  2005/03/07 15:29:24  borchert
.\" some minor fixes including SEE ALSO table
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  2003/07/10 09:27:56  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  1992/03/24 09:22:36  borchert
.\" Archives renamed to UnixArchives
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  1991/11/22  09:15:38  borchert
.\" errors parameter added
.\" queue events now via RelatedEvents
.\" new error handling
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1991/01/03  22:24:33  borchert
.\" typo error fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  90/08/31  17:02:11  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\" 
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
