'\" t
.\" --------------------------------------
.\" Oberon System Documentation   AFB 8/90
.\" (c) University of Ulm, SAI, D-7900 Ulm
.\" --------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH UnixEnvironment 3 "Last change: 24 March 1992" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
UnixEnvironment \- get environment parameters
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
TYPE Stream = POINTER TO StreamRec;
TYPE StreamRec = RECORD (Streams.StreamRec) END;
.sp 0.7
PROCEDURE String(name: ARRAY OF CHAR; VAR value: ARRAY OF CHAR) : BOOLEAN;
PROCEDURE Open(VAR value: Streams.Stream; name: ARRAY OF CHAR) : BOOLEAN;
PROCEDURE OpenAll(VAR stream: Streams.Stream);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
The UNIX environment is a list of parameters of the form
name=value.
.I String
looks for an environment parameter with name
.I name
and store its associated value (behind "=") into
.IR value .
.I Open
opens
.I value
as stream for reading the value associated with
.IR name .
.I String
and
.I Open
return
.B FALSE
if
.I name
is not found.
.PP
.I OpenAll
opens all environment parameters for reading.
The environment parameters are 0X-terminated.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.TS
lfI lw(4.5i).
Streams(3)	stream operations
SysArgs(3)	T{
the environment parameters are taken from \fISysArgs.environ\fP.
T}
UnixArgLists(3)	construction of an environment list
.TE
.SH BUGS
The streams opened by
.I Open
and
.I OpenAll
are not capable of seek and tell operations.
.PP
There is no convenient way to redefine single environment parameters.
Instead of this,
.I UnixArgLists
must be used to construct an entirely new one.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: UnixEnviro.3,v 1.3 1992/03/24 09:23:09 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: UnixEnviro.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  1992/03/24  09:23:09  borchert
.\" Environment renamed to UnixEnvironment
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1991/06/19  16:06:26  borchert
.\" returned streams are now of type Streams.Stream
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  90/08/31  17:02:13  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\" 
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
