.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH UnixTmpNames 3 "Last change: 13 March 1995" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
UnixTmpNames \- generation of unique names for temporary files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE Create(VAR name: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE CreateD(dir: ARRAY OF CHAR; VAR name: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Create
returns an unique path name for a temporary file.
While \fICreate\fP chooses the default directory for
temporary files, \fICreateD\fP allows to specify the
path name of a temporary directory.
Temporary file names are of the following form:
.IP
\fItmpdir/cmdname.pid.unique.random\fP
.LP
where
.LP
.Tb cmdname
.Tp tmpdir
is the directory,
.Tp cmdname
is the name of the command
(up to 8 characters; see \fIUnixArguments(3)\fP),
.Tp pid
is the process id (see \fISysProcess(3)\fP),
.Tp unique
is a per-process unique number, and
.Tp random
an additional sequence of random characters (7 characters).
.Te
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.Tb xxxxxxxxxxx
.Tp TMPDIR
specifies the default directory for temporary files.
.Te
.SH FILES
.Tb xxxxxxxxxxx
.Tp /tmp
Default directory for temporary files,
if not overridden by the environment variable \fITMPDIR\fP.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb xxxxxxxxxxx
.Tp UnixFiles(3)
streams which interfaces UNIX files
.Te
.SH BUGS
The current version does not assert the uniqueness
by looking up in the directory for temporary files.
In practice, however, the random character sequence
assures the uniqueness even in pathological cases
where there are remaining temporary files of a previous
process with the same process id and the same command name.
.LP
Given a command name of 8 characters in length,
\fIUnixTmpNames\fP returns a base name length of
at least 24 for long command names.
This may be too long for old-fashioned UNIX file systems.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: UnixTmpNam.3,v 1.1 1995/03/13 10:01:37 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: UnixTmpNam.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  1995/03/13  10:01:37  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
