.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-1995 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH UnixTerminals 3 "Last change: 2 January 1996" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
UnixTerminals \- UNIX implementation of terminals
.SH SYNOPSIS
.Pg
PROCEDURE OpenByName(VAR s: Streams.Stream; devicename, tiname: ARRAY OF CHAR;
		  errors: RelatedEvents.Object): BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.5
PROCEDURE Open(VAR s: Streams.Stream; instream, outstream: Streams.Stream; 
		 tiname: ARRAY OF CHAR; errors: RelatedEvents.Object): BOOLEAN;
.Pe
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I UnixTerminals
provides an implementation for terminals under UNIX based on the
terminfo database.
.PP
.I OpenByName 
opens the terminal given by 
.IR devicename .
The device must not be opened already. 
.I tiname 
is the name of the associated terminfo file.
Both names must be 0X-terminated strings.
In case of an empty terminfo name the name given by the environment variable
TERM is used. The name of the device must not be an empty string.
.PP
.I UnixTerminals
connects 
.I Terminals.console
to the controlling terminal of the process, i.e. the terminal the user logged
in.
.PP
Before exiting the program all opened terminals
must be closed explicitely by the user. As an alternative 
\fIProcess.Terminate\fP can be called.
.SH BUGS
Because of the architecture of UNIX, the events defined by \fITerminals(3)\fP
are only available for the controlling terminal.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb Terminals(3)
.Tp RelatedEvents(3)
relate events to objects
.Tp StreamConditions(3)
wait until a stream becomes ready for input and output
.Tp Streams(3)
abstraction for byte oriented and output
.Tp Terminals(3)
abstraction for terminals
.Tp TermAttributes(3)
support of display attributes on ASCII terminals
.Tp TermInfos(3)
interface to the UNIX terminfo database
.Tp TermKeys(3)
support of function keys on ASCII terminals
.Tp TermLineGraphics(3)
support of line graphics on ASCII terminals
.Te
.SH AUTHOR
Ralf Beck
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: UnixTerminals.3,v 1.3 1996/01/02 13:02:22 rbeck Exp rbeck $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: UnixTerminals.3,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  1996/01/02  13:02:22  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  1995/12/14  15:22:32  rbeck
.\" *** empty log message ***
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  1995/12/13  14:52:31  rbeck
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
