.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH adis-ftpsession 1 "Last change: 22 September 2004" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
adis-ftpsession \- run FTP session
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B adis-ftpsession
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-m
.IR umask ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR timeout ]
.RB [ \-u | \-U ]
.I root-directory
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I adis-ftpsession
runs a pipelining FTP session that requires no further authorization
on the bidirectional network connection passed via file descriptor 0.
Access is provided to
.I root-directory
and its sub directories.
.LP
Following options are supported:
.TP 8
.SM
.B \-c
suppress the latency reducing technique that opens IP addresses provided
by \fBPORT\fP commands immediately after seeing them.  Instead, wait
until a command is issued that utilizes a data connection. Note that
\fIadis-ftpsession\fP falls automatically into this mode on the first
failure of an early connect.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-m " umask"
set the umask of the FTP server to \fIumask\fP which is to
be given in octal. This is useful to override a too restrictive
default in case of FTP logins that access directories shared by
a group.
.TP
.SM
.BI \-t " timeout"
sets the timeout to \fItimeout\fP seconds. A timeout of 0 switches off
the timer. By default, there is a time limit of 600 seconds of
inactivity after which a session will be hung up by \fIadis-ftpsession\fP.
.TP
.SM
.B \-u
enable non-destructive uploads, i.e. files and directories may be
created as long existing files and directories are not harmed.
Rename operations are not permitted.
.TP
.SM
.B \-U
provide unrestricted write access.
.LP
.I adis-ftpsession
may be called directly by a port listener (tcpserver,
for example) to provide anonymous FTP service or indirectly
under the application of \fIadis-ftplogin(1)\fP (to read
in the credentials) and any checkpassword plug-in
(\fIadis-ftplogin(1)\fP, for example).
.LP
The set of FTP commands implemented by
\fIFTPSessions(3)\fP, \fIFTPDataStreams(3)\fP, and
\fIFTPUnixFileSystems(3)\fP is provided.
Note that \fBUSER\fP, \fBPASS\fP, and \fBACCT\fP
are always responded with a code of 230,
indicating that access is already granted.
.LP
.I adis-ftpsession
supports pipelining (see \fIFTPEngine(3)\fP) according to
\fBhttp://cr.yp.to/ftp/pipelining.html\fP.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I adis-ftpsession
creates a pipeline to \fB/var/qmail/bin/splogger\fP to log
all processed commands together with the return codes to
syslog (\fBauth.info\fP).
.SH FILES
There are no configuration files.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
.I adis-ftplogin
should never be run under root privileges.
Instead normal user privileges are best for user configured
FTP logins (see \fIadis-ftplogin(1)\fP), and, in case
of anonymous FTP servers, a special user ID that does not own
any files should be chosen.
.LP
The security considerations of \fIFTPUnixFileSystems(3)\fP and
\fIFTPDataStreams(3)\fP apply.
.SH EXAMPLE
To set up an anonymous FTP service on a non-privileged port
(9030 in this example) is
pretty easy using \fItcpserver\fP and \fIadis-ftpsession\fP.
The only tricky part is to create a FTP greeting in a shell
variable that ends in CR LF:
.Pg
hi="`echo '220 Hi!\r'`
"
tcpserver -B "$hi" 0 9030 adis-ftpsession ~/pub/ftp
.Pe
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
.Tp adis-ftplogin(1)
checkpassword plug-in that enables
user configurable FTP logins
.Tp adis-ftpup(1)
part of the FTP session that reads user name and password,
if required.
.Tp FTPDataStreams(3)
implements the FTP commands that are related to data connections
.Tp FTPEngine(3)
pipelining FTP server engine
.Tp FTPUnixFileSystems(3)
provides access to the UNIX file system
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: adis-ftpsession.1,v 1.3 2004/09/22 21:35:54 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: adis-ftpsession.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.3  2004/09/22 21:35:54  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/12/06 15:18:07  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/05/15 14:56:59  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
