.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH adis-ftplogin 1 "Last change: 15 May 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
adis-ftplogin \- checkpassword plug-in for FTP logins
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B adis-ftplogin
.I command
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I adis-ftplogin
is a plug-in that conforms to the checkpassword interface by
Dan J. Bernstein
that may be used in the context of \fIadis-ftpup(1)\fP and
\fIadis-ftpsession(1)\fP.
.LP
.I adis-ftplogin
.IP \(bu
extracts a user name and a password from file descriptor 3,
.IP \(bu
derives a login name from the user name by taking the part
before the first dash in it,
.IP \(bu
checks the login for existance and retrieves its passwd entry
using \fIgetpwnam(3c)\fP,
.IP \(bu
verifies that the given password does not match that of the
passwd entry,
.IP \(bu
denies further proceeding for UIDs less than 100,
.IP \(bu
changes effective and real user and group IDs to those of
the passwd entry,
.IP \(bu
honors all further groups like \fIinitgroups(3c)\fP,
.IP \(bu
tries to open \fB.ftppasswd\fP in the home directory specified
in the passwd entry,
.IP \(bu
looks for an entry inside \fB.ftppasswd\fP for the given
user name (consisting of the login name, a dash, and an
extension part),
.IP \(bu
checks the password against that of the \fB.ftppasswd\fP entry, and
.IP \(bu
if all checks succeeded, invokes \fIcommand\fP with the options
and the root directory found in the third field of the matching
\fB.ftppasswd\fP entry.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I adis-ftplogin
does not touch the bidirectional network connection inherited through file
descriptor 0. The network connection, however, is closed in case
of failures as \fIadis-ftplogin\fP is (in a typical setup)
the only process keeping it. Hence, FTP clients will just see a
drop of the connection instead of an error message in case of
authentication failures.
.LP
An exit code of 1 indicates a permanent authorization failure,
an exit code of 111 is used for temporary problems.
.LP
A log entry is provided to syslog with priority \fBauth.info\fP
for each invocation that
.IP \(bu
documents the parameters passed to \fIcommand\fP in case of success, or
.IP \(bu
provide an error message otherwise.
.LP
The password is not logged.
.LP
An email message to \fBroot\fP is generated
.IP \(bu
if a password was provided that matches the login password, and
.IP \(bu
on tries to login as root or other accounts with a UID less than 100.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
As long no encrypting network layers are involved, login credentials for
FTP are passed as clear text over network connections.
Therefore protocols like that of ssh and scp are to be preferred.
In many contexts,
however, FTP with all its inherent insecurities is the only convenient
option to exchange data.
The idea of \fIadis-ftplogin\fP is to minimize the risk of clear text
passwords for FTP by
.IP \(bu
enforcing other passwords than the fully privileged password
that allows to login to a ordinary shell, and by
.IP \(bu
allowing an unrestricted number of FTP logins
to make individual FTP accesses as restrictive as possible.
.LP
It may be wise, however, to apply periodical checks on
the root directories and options specified in the user's
\fB.ftppasswd\fP files if they match the local policy.
The security considerations of \fIFTPUnixFileSystems(3)\fP apply here.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The checkpassword interface is documented on
\fBhttp://cr.yp.to/checkpwd/interface.html\fP.
.LP
.Tb adis-ftpsession(1)
.Tp adis-ftpup(1)
reads user name and password and provides them to a plug-in
like \fIadis-ftplogin\fP.
.Tp adis-ftpsession(1)
usually taken for \fIcommand\fP that
runs the FTP session after a successful authorization.
.Tp dot-ftppasswd(5)
documentation of the file format of \fB.ftppasswd\fP files.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: adis-ftplogin.1,v 1.1 2001/05/15 09:09:14 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: adis-ftplogin.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/05/15 09:09:14  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
