.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2006 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH adis-ftpup 1 "Last change: 6 December 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
adis-ftpup \- read user name and password for a FTP session
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B adis-ftpup
.RB [ -a ]
.RB [ -t
.IR timeout ]
.I command
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I adis-ftpup
processes the login part of a FTP session,
requiring a user name and a password, and
passes the credentials without further checks to
.I command
in conformance to the checkpassword interface of Dan J. Bernstein,
see \fBhttp://cr.yp.to/checkpwd/interface.html\fP.
.LP
By default, there is a time limit that drops the connection
after 60 seconds of inactivity. The option \fB-t\fP allows
to specify another time limit in seconds. A time limit of 0
permits connections to hang for infinite periods.
.LP
The option \fB-a\fP, if given, explicitly prohibits anonymous
logins. The special user names \fIanonymous\fP and \fIftp\fP
which are used for anonymous logins are rejected by
.I adis-ftpup
which allows some clients to retry a login with a non-anonymous
login.
.LP
.I adis-ftpup
expects file descriptor 0 (standard input) to be connected
to a bi-directional network connection where,
in conformance to the FTP protocol (see RFC 959, 5.4), a connection
greeting must have already been sent to the FTP client.
Following set of FTP commands is supported:
.IP \fBUSER\fP
takes a user name and returns with a code of 331.
.IP \fBPASS\fP
sets the password, returns with a code of 230, and
causes the initial session of \fIadis-ftpup\fP to
be finished.
.IP \fBACCT\fP
is always responded with a code of 500.
.IP \fBQUIT\fP
terminates the connection without proceeding to \fIcommand\fP.
.IP \fBNOOP\fP
is answered by a code of 200.
.IP \fBABOR\fP
is always responded with a code of 226.
.LP
All other FTP commands are, in deviance from the minimal set
specified by RFC 959 (section 5.1), rejected
with a code of 502.  It is not possible, for example, to set transfer
parameters before finishing authorization.
.LP
If successful (by seeing a syntactically valid \fBPASS\fP command),
\fIcommand\fP is invoked that inherits the open bidirectional connection
on file descriptor 0, and gets, in conformance to the
checkpassword interface, the credentials passed via file descriptor 3
using a pipeline. It waits then until \fIcommand\fP is finished
and exits with an exit code of 0.
.LP
.I adis-ftpup
supports pipelining (see \fIFTPEngine(3)\fP) according to
\fBhttp://cr.yp.to/ftp/pipelining.html\fP.
.SH "SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS"
.I adis-ftpup
requires itself no root or other special privileges.
But, under the assumption that it is normally run under root privileges,
.I adis-ftpup
.IP \(bu
invokes no external commands except for \fIcommand\fP,
.IP \(bu
does not access the file system (no configuration files,
no logs), and
.IP \(bu
does not connect to other services.
.LP
The supplied credentials are passed to the checkpassword interface
only. They are not revealed otherwise.
.LP
The security considerations of \fIFTPRequests(3)\fP apply.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb FTPAuthReader(3)
.Tp adis-ftplogin(1)
possible plug-in that performs the authentication.
.Tp adis-ftpsession(1)
allows to continue a FTP session in case of a successful authentication.
.Tp FTPAuthReader(3)
implements \fBUSER\fP, \fBPASS\fP, and \fBACCT\fP.
.Tp FTPSessions(3)
implements \fBQUIT\fP, \fBNOOP\fP, and \fBABOR\fP.
.Tp FTPEngine(3)
implements general session engine for a FTP server.
.Tp tcpserver
recommended listener that is documented
on \fBhttp://cr.yp.to/ucspi-tcp/tcpserver.html\fP.
Note that option \fB-B\fP must
not be forgotten to send the connection greeting.
.Te
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The idea to modularize Internet services in a series of
consecutive processes that
.IP \(bu
listen on a port (\fIinetd\fP or \fItcpserver\fP), 
.IP \(bu
check the client connection (tcp wrappers by Wietse Venema),
.IP \(bu
read in the login credentials (\fIadis-ftpup\fP),
.IP \(bu
check them in a separate plug-in
(\fIcheckpassword\fP or \fIadis-ftplogin\fP),
set user and group IDs, and
.IP \(bu
run the rest of the session in user mode (\fIadis-ftpsession(1)\fP),
.LP
is derived from the typical setup of the POP3 service for Qmail by
Dan J. Bernstein.
.SH BUGS
.I adis-ftpup
deliberately deviates from the minimal set of FTP commands
required by RFC 959 (section 5.1). It does so by design for
the sake of simplicity. The latter is achieved by sharing
the checkpassword interface with services like \fIqmail-popup(1)\fP
without bloating it up with more status informations.
.LP
The \fBPASS\fP command is answered by an immediate return
code of 230 that indicates that the authorization was successful
while, however, the login credentials will be checked later
by \fIcommand\fP that usually decides to close the connection
in case of authorization failures. Hence, an invalid combination
of login and password is noted by a connection loss instead
of a return code stating this.
.LP
There is no option yet that allows the connection greeting
to be provided. This would make the invocation of \fIadis-ftpup\fP
easier using listeners other than \fItcpserver(1)\fP.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: adis-ftpup.1,v 1.2 2001/12/06 15:18:36 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: adis-ftpup.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/12/06 15:18:36  borchert
.\" typo fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2001/05/14 14:10:21  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
