.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2005 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH cdbd 1 "Last change: 10 February 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
cdbd \- CDB daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cdbd
.RB [ \-a
.IR authfile ]
.RB [ \-b
.IR basedir ]
.RB { \-B
.I bind-address
.IR port }
.RB [ \-i
.IR intensity ]
.RB [ \-m ]
.RB [ \-r
.IR read-auth ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR shutdown-auth ]
.RB [ \-w
.IR write-auth ]
.I dbname
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I cdbd
provides a persistent storage for the compiler database (CDB).
All objects are stored using a container (see \fIContainers(3)\fP
and \fIStandardContainers(3)\fP) that is based upon a safe
storage using \fITransStreams(3)\fP on a regular file named \fIdbname\fP.
The database file \fIdbname\fP will be created if it does not exist yet.
.LP
Note that database files basing on \fIStandardContainers(3)\fP and
\fITransStreams(3)\fP contain holes causing the size returned by
\fIstat(2)\fP to be much larger than the actual disk usage.
These files must be copied with care (either compress them first,
or use options like \fB-sparse\fP of \fIstar(1)\fP). It is not
safe, however, to copy a database file while \fIcdbd\fP is running.
.LP
All objects of the database are visible through the Oberon name space
system (see \fINames(3)\fP) and will be mounted at \fIbasedir\fP
(default \fI/pub/cdb\fP).  Note that \fIbasedir\fP must exist already.
.LP
The root directory of the name space of \fIcdbd\fP has two entries:
a directory named \fImodules\fP and a maintenance object called
\fIcdbd\fP that can be used by \fIonsstat(1)\fP or \fIonsshut(1)\fP.
Below \fImodules\fP a directory is created for each existing
module with following sub structure:
.LP
.nf
\fImodname\fP/obj/\fIgenkey\fP/\fIarch\fP/\fIarchkey\fP/def/\fIsrcid\fP/\fIsth unique\fP
\h'\w'\fImodname\fP/obj/\fIgenkey\fP/\fIarch\fP/\fIarchkey\fP'u'/mod/\fIsrcid\fP/\fIsth unique\fP
\h'\w'\fImodname\fP/obj/\fIgenkey\fP'u'/gen/def/\fIsrcid\fP/\fIsth unique\fP
\h'\w'\fImodname\fP/obj/\fIgenkey\fP/gen'u'/mod/\fIsrcid\fP/\fIsth unique\fP
\h'\w'\fImodname\fP'u'/src/def/\fIsrcid\fP
\h'\w'\fImodname\fP/src'u'/mod/\fIsrcid\fP
.fi
.LP
Following definitions apply:
.Tb "sth unique"
.Tp modname
modname
the full unabridged named of the module
.Tp genkey
the architecture-independent key (in ASCII form),
see \fICompilerKeys(3)\fP
.Tp arch
the architecture (in ASCII form), see \fIArchitectures(3)\fP
archkey	the architecture-dependent key (in ASCII form)
.Tp srcid
MD5 checksum of the source
.Tp "sth unique"
an unique name that will be generated by \fICDBNames(3)\fP
.Te
.LP
.I cdbd
may be terminated by killing it (sending \fBSIGTERM\fP is preferred), or
invoking \fBonsshut(1)\fP for the object named \fIcdbd\fP in the base directory.
On termination, \fIcdbd\fP does not necessarily finish any on-going
transactions or requests.
.LP
Following options are supported:
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-a " authfile"
specifies a file containing a persistent object of type
\fIShards.Lid\fP that is to be used for authorization to
insert the root node of CDB into the Oberon name space.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-b " basedir"
defines the base path of the compiler data base (CDB). Default is
.IR /pub/cdb .
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-B " bind-address port"
add this port to those ports used by \fIRemoteObjects(3)\fP.
By default an ephemeral port address is taken.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-i " intensity"
allows to set the intensity level for \fIStorage.Intensity\fP
(see \fIStorage(3)\fP). This allows to fine-tune the balance of
memory usage vs CPU time by the garbage collection. By default,
the intensity is 9. Lower intensity values reduce memory usage
but cause CPU overhead by more frequent garbage collections.
Higher intensity values cause more memory to be used while saving
more CPU time. Please note however, that the address space can
also be a significant limit, i.e. at high intensity values it
is possible that no more address space is found by \fIMemory(3)\fP.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-m
asks to setup performance monitoring by \fISysMonitor(3)\fP.
Statistics are printed to standard output whenever \fBSIGALRM\fP
is received.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-r " read-auth"
specifies a file containing a persistent pair of shards (of types
\fIShards.Lid\fP and \fIShards.Pot\fP). If given, all read-only accesses
must provide a lid that fits to the pot of \fIread-auth\fP. By default no
authorization is required for read-only accesses. If this file does not
exist yet, it is created and initialized with a pair of private shards
(see \fIPrivateShards(3)\fP).
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-s " shutdown-auth"
specifies a file containing a persistent pair of shards (of types
\fIShards.Lid\fP and \fIShards.Pot\fP). Shutdown operations on the
\fIcdbd\fP object in the root directory must provide a lid that
fits to \fIshutdown-auth\fP. By default, \fIshutdown-auth\fP equals
\fIwrite-auth\fP.  If this file does not exist yet, it is created and
initialized with a pair of private shards (see \fIPrivateShards(3)\fP).
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-w " write-auth"
specifies a file containing a persistent pair of shards (of types
\fIShards.Lid\fP and \fIShards.Pot\fP). If given, all write-accesses
must provide a lid that fits to the pot of \fIwrite-auth\fP. By default,
write accesses are prohibited to everybody.  If this file does not
exist yet, it is created and initialized with a pair of private shards
(see \fIPrivateShards(3)\fP).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fIUnixNames(3)\fP is used to find the shared Oberon name space.
This module considers the environment variable \fBONS_ROOT\fP
to find the Oberon name server.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb obload(1)
.Tp obload(1)
compiles (if necessary) and loads modules.
.Tp obci(1)
check in Oberon sources into the CDB.
.Tp obco(1)
check out Oberon sources from the CDB.
.Tp pons(1)
daemon defining the shared root of the Oberon name space.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: cdbd.1,v 1.5 2005/02/10 13:43:43 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: cdbd.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.5  2005/02/10 13:43:43  borchert
.\" description of authorization option improved
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  2005/02/10 08:11:30  borchert
.\" option -B added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  2004/09/20 09:52:31  borchert
.\" options ``-i'' and ``-m'' added, ``-l'' removed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2001/12/06 15:19:35  borchert
.\" typos fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2000/03/29 20:18:16  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
