.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2009 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH dnsfqdn 1 "Last change:   " "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
dnsfqdn \- deliver the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) for a host
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsfqdn
.I hostname
|
.I IPv4 address
|
.I IPv6 address
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I dnsfqdn
accepts either a hostname which is not necessarily qualified, an IPv4 or
IPv6 address and prints, if possible, a fully qualified domain name for
it to the standard output. In case of hostnames this is done by trying
to resolve the name under the consideration of the local domain or the
search list of domains configured in the local
.I /etc/resolv.conf
configuration file. In case of IPv4 or IPv6 addresses, a
reverse lookup is performed to retrieve the corresponding hostname.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The environment parameters of \fIDNSStdResolvers(3)\fP are supported:
.Tb LOCALDOMAIN
.Tp DNSCACHEIP
If defined, overrides the \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP configuration
and selects the given IPv4 address (in dotted decimal notation) of a
DNS cache as the only nameserver.
.Tp LOCALDOMAIN
Defines, if given, the local domain. By default, the settings
of ``domain'' and ``search'' within the \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP
configuration file are considered.
.Tp LOCALRES
Selects, if defined, the configuration file that
conforms to \fIresolv.conf(4)\fP.
.Te
.SH EXAMPLE
Following example retrieves the fully qualified name of the current host:
.Pg
$ dnsfqdn `hostname`
clonard.mathematik.uni-ulm.de
$
.Pe
.SH FILES
.Tb /etc/resolv.conf
.Tp /etc/resolv.conf
The default configuration file.
.Te
.SH HISTORY
This utility is similar to \fIdnsfq\fP which is shipped with
Dan J. Bernstein's qmail package. In contrast to \fIdnsfq\fP,
\fIdnsfqdn\fP supports IPv6 addresses and does not return
the reversed name unless a numeric IP address was given or
its name matches that of the given hostname.
