.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH obbuild 1 "Last change: 5 February 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
obbuild \- build a static Oberon executable
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B obbuild
.RB [ -a
.IR auth ]
.RB { -b
.IR basedir }
.RB [ -l
.IR loglevel ]
.RB [ -o
.IR output ]
.RB { module }
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIobbuild(1)\fP takes the given list of modules as core,
adds the required runtime modules, loads the transitive closure
of it using \fIobload(1)\fP, and combines the results to one
statically linked executable.
.PP
Please note that before any modules can be loaded, their
sources must have been uploaded to the compiler database (CDB)
using, for example, \fIobci(1)\fP. Compilation options
are to be stored together with the sources during the upload
process to the database.
.PP
Following options are supported:
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-a " auth"
specifies a file containing a persistent object of type
\fIShards.Lid\fP that is to be used for authorization.
By default, the authority file of the standard installation
of \fIcdbd(1)\fP is taken.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-b " basedir"
defines the base path of the compiler data base (CDB). Default is
.IR /pub/cdb/oberon .
Note that any number of base paths may be given. Multiple base
paths are combined through \fITranslucentNames(3)\fP, i.e. results
are written into the last base path, and base paths specified later
on the command line take precedence over those given earlier.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-i " intensity"
allows to set the intensity level for \fIStorage.Intensity\fP
(see \fIStorage(3)\fP) of the \fIobload(1)\fP process.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-l " loglevel"
requests log information as generated via \fICompilerLogs(3)\fP to
be displayed. This is mainly useful to follow the recursive process
of building. A log level of 0 (default) suppresses any logs. Larger
log levels cause more output to generated.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-o " output"
asks the generated executable to be stored into \fIoutput\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb obload(1)
.Tp obci(1)
check-in Oberon sources into the compiler database (CDB)
.Tp obload(1)
load results from the CDB or generate them
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: obbuild.1,v 1.2 2005/02/05 18:40:09 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: obbuild.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2005/02/05 18:40:09  borchert
.\" intensity option added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2004/09/20 13:25:32  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
