'\" t
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2005 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH obci 1 "Last change: 27 April 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
obci \- check in Oberon sources
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B obci
[ option ] ... file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I obci
stores one or more Oberon source files in combination with a set
of compilation options into the compiler database (CDB),
located in the Oberon name space in the directory
.IR /pub/cdb/oberon .
Source files must have a suffix of ``.od'' (in case of definitions) or
``.om'' (in case of modules). No syntax checks are performed but
a module name must be extractable.
.LP
Sources may be checked in any number of times. If the source differs,
a new entry in CDB is created that, by default, takes precedence
over older releases. If the source text is identical to a version
already present in CDB, it's associated header (containing
compilation options and a time stamp) is updated.
.LP
Following options affect
.I obci
directly:
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-a " authfile"
specifies a file containing a persistent object of type
\fIShards.Lid\fP that is to be used for authorization.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-b " basedir"
defines the base path of the compiler data base (CDB). Default is
.IR /pub/cdb/oberon .
.TP 8
.SM
.B \-t
check in all sources with the time stamps (last time of modification)
of their corresponding files (default behaviour).
.TP 8
.SM
.B +t
do not take the modification stamps of the source files but the
current time as time stamp in CDB.
.LP
Compilation options are simply stored into CDB along with the
source text.
Their main use is to fine-tune the set of identifiers visible
as standard identifiers (like \fBINTEGER\fP) and internal modules
(as \fBSYSTEM\fP). By default, these sets are minimized in
conformance to the Oberon reports. Local extensions of \fBSYSTEM\fP
are available on request only.
.LP
Some identifier sets are defined to avoid the necessity of
enumerating a long list of identifiers:
.TP 8
.SM
.B std
Set of standard identifiers as defined in the Oberon report.
.TP 8
.SM
.B sys
Set of identifiers exported by \fBSYSTEM\fP as defined in the Oberon report.
.TP 8
.SM
.B ulmsys
Local set of extensions of \fBSYSTEM\fP (not included by default).
.TP 8
.SM
.B unixsys
Local set of standard functions that support UNIX system
calls: \fBUNIXCALL\fP, \fBUNIXFORK\fP, and
\fBUNIXSIGNAL\fP. Not included by default.
.LP
In addition, some fine-tuning
options are available that cover changes introduced by revisions
of the Oberon report.
.LP
Currently, following options are supported:
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-builtin " modname"
add \fImodname\fP to the list of internal modules that may be
imported like \fBSYSTEM\fP. There are none available yet.
.TP 8
.SM
.B \-ignore-builtin-clashes
do not permit the same identifier specified twice in one
of the internal modules or in the set of standard identifiers (\fBdefault\fP).
.TP 8
.SM
.B +ignore-builtin-clashes
allow name clashes. The first definition of an identifier supersedes
any later additions.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-std " idset"
include the set of identifiers \fIidset\fP to the set of
standard identifiers. The first use of this option empties
the set first. Further uses extend the set.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-sys " idset"
include the set of identifiers \fIidset\fP to the set of
visible identifiers in \fBSYSTEM\fP.
.LP
Following options allow to modify some of the identifier sets.
The option name should be prefixed by \fB+\fP for \fBTRUE\fP,
and
.B \-
for \fBFALSE\fP:
.LP
.TS
lfI lfI l lfB .
option	identifier set	identifiers	default
_
stdbyte	std	\fBBYTE\fP	TRUE
stdsize	std	\fBSIZE\fP	FALSE
sysaddress	ulmsys	\fBADDRESS\fP, \fBUNTRACEDADDRESS\fP	TRUE
sysbyte	sys	\fBBYTE\fP	FALSE
syscr	ulmsys	Ulm's coroutine primitives	TRUE
syshalt	ulmsys	\fBHALT\fP (without cleanup)	TRUE
sysint16	ulmsys	\fBINT16\fP (16-bit integer)	TRUE
syssize	sys	\fBSIZE\fP	TRUE
.TE
.SH EXAMPLES
Check in \fIStreams.od\fP and \fIStreams.om\fP with all extensions
of Ulm enabled in conformance to older Oberon reports:
.Pg
oberon$ A=/var/cdbd/db/write
oberon$ obci -a $A -sys sys -sys ulmsys -sys unixsys Streams.o[dm]
.Pe
.LP
Check in a module in conformance to the latest Oberon report:
.Pg
oberon$ A=/var/cdbd/db/write
oberon$ obci -a $A -stdbyte +sysbyte -syssize +stdsize Hello.mod
.Pe
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Following environment parameters allow to override the builtin
defaults:
.Tb CDB_BASEDIR
.Tp CDB_AUTH
default path of the authorization file.
.Tp CDB_BASEDIR
default path of CDB within the Oberon name space.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb OberonUlmBuiltIns(3)
.Tp cdbd(1)
daemon running CDB.
.Tp obload(1)
compiles (if necessary) and loads modules.
.Tp obzap(1)
removes modules from CDB.
.Tp pons(1)
daemon defining the shared root of the Oberon name space.
.Tp Names(3)
Oberon name space.
.Tp OberonUlmBuiltIns(3)
definition of \fIulmsys\fP.
.Tp OberonStdBuiltIns(3)
definition of \fIstd\fP.
.Tp OberonSysBuiltIns(3)
definition of \fIsys\fP.
.Te
.SH BUGS
Sources checked in are readable for everybody with read access to CDB.
There is currently no difference between shared and private modules.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: obci.1,v 1.7 2005/04/27 15:54:30 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: obci.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.7  2005/04/27 15:54:30  borchert
.\" minor clarification regarding -t and +t
.\"
.\" Revision 1.6  2005/02/05 18:55:49  borchert
.\" environment parameters added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.5  2004/06/03 14:43:09  borchert
.\" standard locations changed:
.\" - by default, database resides under /pub/cdb/oberon
.\" - by default, shard lid is to be found at /var/cdbd/db/write
.\"
.\" Revision 1.4  2001/12/06 15:20:53  borchert
.\" typos fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.3  2001/04/05 06:28:17  borchert
.\" documentation about -t / +t flag fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.2  2000/10/05 21:14:21  borchert
.\" unixsys added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2000/03/29  20:18:27  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
