.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2005 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH obco 1 "Last change: 5 February 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
obco \- check out Oberon sources
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B obco
.RB [ \-a
.IR auth ]
.RB { \-b
.IR basedir }
.RB [ \-D ]
.RB [ \-M ]
.RI { module }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I obco
loads the sources of one or more Oberon modules from the
compiler database (CDB) into the current directory.
Downloaded source files will be named after their module
name and end with ``.od'' (in case of definitions)
or ``.om'' (in case of modules).
.LP
Following options are supported by
.IR obco :
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-a " authfile"
specifies a file containing a persistent object of type
\fIShards.Lid\fP that is to be used for authorization.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-b " basedir"
defines the base path of the compiler data base (CDB). Default is
.IR /pub/cdb/oberon .
Any number of base directories can be specified. Multiple
base directories are combined using \fITranslucentNames(3)\fP,
i.e. they are layered in a way where the last CDB tree takes
precedence over the previous trees.
.TP 8
.SM
.B \-D
Just check out the definitions but not the modules.
.TP 8
.SM
.B \-M
Check out the modules but not the definitions.
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Following environment parameters allow to override the builtin
defaults:
.Tb CDB_BASEDIR
.Tp CDB_AUTH
default path of the authorization file.
.Tp CDB_BASEDIR
default path of CDB within the Oberon name space.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb OberonUlmBuiltIns(3)
.Tp cdbd(1)
daemon running CDB.
.Tp obci(1)
loads sources into the CDB.
.Tp obzap(1)
removes modules from CDB.
.Tp pons(1)
daemon defining the shared root of the Oberon name space.
.Tp Names(3)
Oberon name space.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: obco.1,v 1.2 2005/02/05 18:55:40 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: obco.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2005/02/05 18:55:40  borchert
.\" environment parameters added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2005/01/28 11:03:52  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
