.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2005 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH obzap 1 "Last change: 5 February 2005" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
obzap \- remove module from CDB
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B obzap
.RB [ \-a
.IR authfile ]
.RB [ \-b
.IR basedir ]
\&... module ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I obzap
removes the source texts and all generated objects of the compiler for
the given modules from CDB. Note that single objects may be easily
removed using the \fBkill\fP-command in \fInsh(1)\fP. \fIobzap\fP
works like ``rm -fr'' and may be useful in case of modules that became
obsolete or were renamed.
.LP
Following options are supported:
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-a " authfile"
specifies a file containing a persistent object of type
\fIShards.Lid\fP that is to be used for authorization.
.TP 8
.SM
.BI \-b " basedir"
defines the base path of the compiler data base (CDB). Default is
.IR /pub/cdb/oberon .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Following environment parameters allow to override the builtin
defaults:
.Tb CDB_BASEDIR
.Tp CDB_AUTH
default path of the authorization file.
.Tp CDB_BASEDIR
default path of CDB within the Oberon name space.
.Te
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb obload(1)
.Tp cdbd(1)
daemon running CDB.
.Tp obload(1)
compiles (if necessary) and loads modules.
.Tp obci(1)
check in Oberon sources into CDB.
.Tp pons(1)
daemon defining the shared root of the Oberon name space.
.Te
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: obzap.1,v 1.2 2005/02/05 18:55:56 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: obzap.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.2  2005/02/05 18:55:56  borchert
.\" environment parameters added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.1  2000/03/29 20:18:53  borchert
.\" Initial revision
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
