.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Ulm's Oberon System Documentation
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2000 by University of Ulm, SAI, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
.\" that the sections entitled "GNU General Public License" and "Protect
.\" Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'" are included exactly as in the
.\" original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
.\" distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
.\" one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that the sections entitled "GNU General Public
.\" License" and "Protect Your Freedom--Fight `Look And Feel'", and this
.\" permission notice, may be included in translations approved by the Free
.\" Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Pg
.nf
.ie t \{\
.	sp 0.3v
.	ps 9
.	ft CW
.\}
.el .sp 1v
..
.de Pe
.ie t \{\
.	ps
.	ft P
.	sp 0.3v
.\}
.el .sp 1v
.fi
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Tb
.br
.nr Tw \w'\\$1MMM'
.in +\\n(Twu
..
.de Te
.in -\\n(Twu
..
.de Tp
.br
.ne 2v
.in -\\n(Twu
\fI\\$1\fP
.br
.in +\\n(Twu
.sp -1
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\" Is [prefix]
'\" Ic capability
'\" If procname params [rtype]
'\" Ef
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Is
.br
.ie \\n(.$=1 .ds iS \\$1
.el .ds iS "
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 5
.in +\\n(I1
..
.de Ic
.sp .3
.in -\\n(I1
.nr I1 5
.nr I2 2
.in +\\n(I1
.ti -\\n(I1
If
\.I \\$1
\.B IN
\.IR caps :
.br
..
.de If
.ne 3v
.sp 0.3
.ti -\\n(I2
.ie \\n(.$=3 \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2) : \\$3;
.el \fI\\$1\fP: \fBPROCEDURE\fP(\\*(iS\\$2);
.br
..
.de Ef
.in -\\n(I1
.sp 0.3
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
'\"	Strings - made in Ulm (tm 8/87)
'\"
'\"				troff or new nroff
'ds A \(:A
'ds O \(:O
'ds U \(:U
'ds a \(:a
'ds o \(:o
'ds u \(:u
'ds s \(ss
'\"
'\"     international character support
.ds ' \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(aa\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds ` \h'\w'e'u*4/10'\z\(ga\h'-\w'e'u*4/10'
.ds : \v'-0.6m'\h'(1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.06m'\z.\h'0.2m'\z.\h'-((1u-(\\n(.fu%2u))*0.13m+0.26m)'\v'0.6m'
.ds ^ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z^\h'|\\n:u'
.ds ~ \\k:\h'-\\n(.fu+1u/2u*2u+\\n(.fu-1u*0.13m+0.06m'\z~\h'|\\n:u'
.ds C \\k:\\h'+\\w'e'u/4u'\\v'-0.6m'\\s6v\\s0\\v'0.6m'\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds v \\k:\(ah\\h'|\\n:u'
.ds , \\k:\\h'\\w'c'u*0.4u'\\z,\\h'|\\n:u'
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\fB\\$1\fP"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Op
.TP
.SM
.ie \\n(.$=2 .BI (+|\-)\\$1 " \\$2"
.el .B (+|\-)\\$1
..
.de Mo
.TP
.SM
.BI \\$1 " \\$2"
..
'\"----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH odb 1 "Last change: 6 December 2001" "Release 0.5" "Ulm's Oberon System"
.SH NAME
odb \- Oberon debugger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B odb
.BI [ a.out
.BI [ core ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I odb
allows the examination of core files that result from a
crash of an Oberon program.
It expects the executable file (default \fIa.out\fP) and
its associated core file (default \fIcore\fP) to be
given as command line arguments.
After successful loading both files, a command shell is offered.
.SS Commands
Commands consist of an optional integer count,
an optional command name (default is \fInext\fP),
and optional arguments, separated
by white space. Arguments may be integer or hexidecimal numbers
(in Oberon syntax), non-qualified Oberon identifiers, strings
(enclosed in double quotes), or texts (anything else that does
not include white space, quotes, backslashes, semicolons and
comment marks).
Commands are separated by line terminators or semicolons.
Commands may be extended over multiple lines if a backslash
is given at the end of the lines to be continued.
Comments are introduced by a hash mark ('#') and extend to
the end of the line.
Detection of EOF terminates the debugger.
.LP
Command line input is processed by the GNU readline library
that supports a history and commandline editing in a configurable way.
By default, editing is similar to \fIemacs(1)\fP.
Friends of \fIvi(1)\fP should add ``set editing-mode vi'' to
the file \fI~/.inputrc\fP.
.SS Views
Views present selected informations and
work like read-only buffers in editors. There is always a current view,
the initial one presenting the backtrace of the current coroutine,
and a current position within a view. Following commands
allow to move within a view and to print selected lines of a view:
.Tb rewind
.Tp move
move forward (or backward) the number of lines given by
the count (default 1) without printing anything.
.Tp next
move forward (or backward) the number of lines given by
the count (default 1) and print them.
.Tp prev
works like \fInext\fP but in the opposite direction.
.Tp rewind
move to the first line in the current view.
.Tp n
works like \fInext\fP but takes 23 as default count.
.Tp u
prints the number of lines specified by the count surrounding
the current line.
.Tp b
prints the number of lines specified by the count backward
from the current position without changing it.
.Tp
.Te
.SS "Switching Views"
Following commands allow to switch to another view:
.Tb modules
.Tp cr
switches to a view showing all coroutines.
.Tp d
descend from the current position and switch to an associated view
(works similar to a hyperlink in the worldwide web).
This is a data view from other data views, module views, and backtraces.
.Tp module
switches to a view presenting a module whose name has to be
specified by the first argument.
.Tp modules
switches to a view presenting all modules.
.Tp p
switches to the backtrace of the current coroutine.
.Tp t
switches to a view presenting the current source.
.Tp vi
invokes an editor (\fBvi\fP by default) on the current source position.
.Te
.SS Marks
The views are connected like a web. There are some global entry
points (the backtrace views of the coroutines and the modules) from
where hyperlinks may be followed using the ``d'' command.
To allow to return to views seen earlier it is possible to mark
views (and a position within a view):
.Tb marks
.Tp mark
marks the current position in the current view with the given
name (first argument).
.Tp goto
switches to the position marked earlier under the given name.
.Tp marks
switches to a window presenting all marks defined earlier.
.Te
.SS "Miscellaneous Commands"
.Tb
.Tp gpl
presents the GNU General Public License in a separate view.
.Tp help
switches to a view presenting a help text.
.Te
.SH EXAMPLE
Following example examines the backtrace, moves to the local
variables of the procedure that caused the crash and shows
the associated program text:
.Pg
oberon$ odb Example core     
Oberon Debugger for SPARCv8 / Solaris 2.x platform
Copyright 2000 Andreas Borchert
ODB is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License, and you are
welcome to change it and/or distribute copies of it under certain conditions.
Type "gpl" to see the conditions.  There is absolutely no warranty for ODB.

Try "help" for an initial help page and use RETURNs or "n" to browse forward.

module                   procedure      base     top      pc       line

SysProcess               Kill           00131a10 001319b0 00078c6c  143
odb> 6 move;u
module                   procedure      base     top      pc       line

SysProcess               Kill           00131a10 001319b0 00078c6c  143
SysProcess               Abort          00131a70 00131a10 00079654  334
UnixProcess              Abort          00131ab0 00131a70 0002ee10   40
Process                  Abort          00131b08 00131ab0 000164d4  120
SysSignals               SignalHandler  00131c10 00131b08 00073b34  194
<< interrupted by signal SIGSEGV >>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example                  PrintList      bfffdc60 bfffdc18 0001042c   31
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example                  PrintList      bfffdca8 bfffdc60 00010434   31
Example                  PrintList      bfffdcf0 bfffdca8 00010434   31
Example                  PrintList      bfffdd38 bfffdcf0 00010434   31
Example                  Example        bfffdd88 bfffdd38 00010500   37
SysMain                  InitAllModules bfffdde8 bfffdd88 0002f4c0   65
odb> mark crash; d
   * VAR  list           Example.Object -> NIL
odb> goto crash
Example                  PrintList      bfffdc60 bfffdc18 0001042c   31
odb> t
      Write.Int(list.info, 1); Write.Ln;
odb> 2 u
   BEGIN
      PrintList(list.next);
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Write.Int(list.info, 1); Write.Ln;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   END PrintList;

.Pe
Note that the source lines shown are not always accurate. In this example,
the crash happened on the former line on retrieving \fIlist.next\fP
with \fIlist\fP having a value of \fBNIL\fP.
References through \fBNIL\fP cause a segmentation violation
(signal \fBSIGSEGV\fP, see \fIsiginfo(3HEAD)\fP), which in turn
is handled by \fISysSignals(3)\fP that, being unable to resolve that
problem in this case, decides to abort the process (see \fIProcess(3)\fP).
.LP
Linear lists (like in this case) and dynamic data structures in general
may be easily navigated through using ``d'' commands:
.Pg
odb> module Example
   * VAR  list           Example.Object -> Example.ObjectRec at 0EEE40H
odb> d
   * FIELD  info           INTEGER  1
odb> 
   * FIELD  next           Example.Object -> Example.ObjectRec at 0EEE30H
odb> d;n
   * FIELD  info           INTEGER  2
   * FIELD  next           Example.Object -> Example.ObjectRec at 0EEE20H
odb> d;n
   * FIELD  info           INTEGER  3
   * FIELD  next           Example.Object -> NIL
odb> 
.Pe
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.Tb reffile(5)
.Tp adb(1)
another debugger
.Tp oc(1)
Oberon compiler
.Tp reffile(5)
format of reference files
.Tp truss(1)
trace utility for system calls
.Te
.SH FILES
.Tb /home/obsrc/library/REF
.Tp *.r
reference files
.Tp REF
archive with reference files
.Tp /home/obsrc/library/REF
Oberon library reference files
.Tp a.out
default object file
.Tp core
default core file
.Te
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.Tb OBPATH
.Tp EDITOR
preferred editor of the ``vi'' command,
is overridden by \fIVISUAL\fP if defined.
.Tp OBLIB
location of Oberon library, default is \fI/home/obsrc/library\fP.
.Tp OBPATH
colon-separated list of directories containing, sources,
reference files and archives of reference files (\fIREF\fP).
.Tp VISUAL
preferred editor of the ``vi'' command, defaults to \fIvi\fP.
.Te
.SH BUGS
Debugging at runtime is not supported yet.
.LP
There is no support for the examination of registers 
or other low-level informations (use \fIadb(1)\fP instead).
.LP
There is no ``-l'' option in conformance to \fIoc(1)\fP and
\fImmo(1)\fP. Instead \fIOBPATH\fP has to be extended
with (equally named) subdirectories of \fIOBLIB\fP
for additional libraries.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Id: odb.1,v 1.13 2001/12/06 15:22:49 borchert Exp $
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" $Log: odb.1,v $
.\" Revision 1.13  2001/12/06 15:22:49  borchert
.\" typos fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.12  2000/09/12 13:32:21  borchert
.\" minor layout error fixed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.11  2000/09/12 13:20:39  borchert
.\" new odb version for SPARC version which comes with a
.\" new user interface
.\"
.\" Revision 1.10  1996/01/04 15:04:00  borchert
.\" d-window supports now records and arrays
.\"
.\" Revision 1.9  1996/01/04  14:51:54  borchert
.\" - some typos fixed
.\" - list of bugs and shortcomings extended
.\" - hint for return values added
.\"
.\" Revision 1.8  1993/03/24  12:52:58  borchert
.\" e, p, and M command removed
.\"
.\" Revision 1.7  1993/03/24  12:46:54  borchert
.\" odb version of Andreas Haupt replaced by mdb-hack
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
